                                                                                           The LUX-ZEPLIN (LZ) Experiment

                                                       D.S. Akeriba,b , C.W. Akerlofc , D. Yu. Akimovd , A. Alquahtanie , S.K. Alsumf , T.J. Andersona,b , N. Angelidesg ,
                                                       H.M. Araújoh , A. Arbucklef , J.E. Armstrongi , M. Arthursc , H. Auyeunga , X. Baij , A.J. Baileyh , J. Balajthyk ,
                                                        S. Balashovl , J. Bange , M.J. Barrym , J. Bartheln , D. Bauerh , P. Bauern , A. Baxtero , J. Bellep , P. Beltrameq ,
                                                          J. Bensingerr , T. Bensonf , E.P. Bernards,m , A. Bernsteint , A. Bhattii , A. Biekerts,m , T.P. Biesiadzinskia,b ,
                                                    B. Birrittellaf , K.E. Boastu , A.I. Bolozdynyad , E.M. Boultonv,s , B. Boxero , R. Bramantea,b , S. Bransonf , P. Brásw ,
                                                   M. Breidenbacha , J.H. Buckleyx , V.V. Bugaevx , R. Bunkerj , S. Burdino , J.K. Busenitzy , J.S. Campbellf , C. Carelsu ,
                                                      D.L. Carlsmithf , B. Carlsonn , M.C. Carmona-Benitezz , M. Cascellag , C. Chane , J.J. Cherwinkaf , A.A. Chilleraa ,
                                                            C. Chilleraa , N.I. Chottj , A. Colem , J. Colemanm , D. Collingh , R.A. Conleya , A. Cottleu , R. Coughlenj ,
                                                       W.W. Craddocka , D. Currann , A. Currieh , J.E. Cutterk , J.P. da Cunhaw , C.E. Dahlab,p , S. Dardinm , S. Dasuf ,
                                                  J. Davisn , T.J.R. Davisonq , L. de Viveirosz , N. Decheinef , A. Dobim , J.E.Y. Dobsong , E. Druszkiewiczac , A. Dushkinr ,
arXiv:1910.09124v2 [physics.ins-det] 4 Nov 2019




                                                        T.K. Edbergi , W.R. Edwardsm , B.N. Edwardsv , J. Edwardsf , M.M. Elnimry , W.T. Emmetv , S.R. Eriksenad ,
                                                       C.H. Fahamm , A. Fana,b , S. Fayerh , S. Fioruccim , H. Flaecherad , I.M. Fogarty Florangi , P. Fordl , V.B. Francisl ,
                                                        F. Froborgh , T. Fruthu , R.J. Gaitskelle , N.J. Gantosm , D. Garciae , A. Geffren , V.M. Gehmanm , R. Gelfandac ,
                                                    J. Genovesij , R.M. Gerhardk , C. Ghagg , E. Gibsonu , M.G.D. Gilchriesem , S. Gokhaleae , B. Gomberf , T.G. Gondaa ,
                                                     A. Greenallo , S. Greenwoodh , G. Gregersonf , M.G.D. van der Grintenl , C.B. Gwilliamo , C.R. Halli , D. Hamiltonf ,
                                                    S. Hansae , K. Hanzelm , T. Harringtonf , A. Harrisonj , C. Hasselkusf , S.J. Haselschwardtaf , D. Hemerk , S.A. Hertelag ,
                                                   J. Heisef , S. Hillbrandk , O. Hitchcockf , C. Hjemfeltj , M.D. Hoffm , B. Holbrookk , E. Holtoml , J.Y-K. Hory , M. Hornn ,
                                                  D.Q. Huange , T.W. Hurteauv , C.M. Ignarraa,b , M.N. Irvingk , R.G. Jacobsens,m , O. Jahangirg , S.N. Jefferyl , W. Jia,b ,
                                                      M. Johnsonn , J. Johnsonk , P. Johnsonf , W.G. Jonesh , A.C. Kabothai,l , A. Kamahaah , K. Kamdinm,s , V. Kaseyh ,
                                                        K. Kazkazt , J. Keefnern , D. Khaitanac , M. Khaleeqh , A. Khazovl , A.V. Khromovd , I. Khuranag , Y.D. Kimaj ,
                                                     W.T. Kimaj , C.D. Kochere , A.M. Konovalovd , L. Korleyr , E.V. Korolkovaak , M. Koyuncuac , J. Krasf , H. Krausu ,
                                                           S.W. Kravitzm , H.J. Krebsa , L. Kreczkoad , B. Kriklerad , V.A. Kudryavtsevak , A.V. Kumpand , S. Kyreaf ,
                                                           A.R. Lambertm , B. Landerudf , N.A. Larsenv , A. Laundrief , E.A. Leasonq , H.S. Leeaj , J. Leeaj , C. Leea,b ,
                                                  B.G. Lenardok , D.S. Leonardaj , R. Leonardj , K.T. Leskom , C. Levyah , J. Liaj , Y. Liuf , J. Liaoe , F.-T. Liaou , J. Lins,m ,
                                                     A. Lindotew , R. Linehana,b , W.H. Lippincottp , R. Liue , X. Liuq , C. Loniewskiac , M.I. Lopesw , B. López Paredesh ,
                                                          W. Lorenzonc , D. Luceron , S. Luitza , J.M. Lylee , C. Lynche , P.A. Majewskil , J. Makkinjee , D.C. Mallinge ,
                                                       A. Manalaysayk , L. Manentig , R.L. Manninof , N. Marangouh , D.J. Markleyp , P. MarrLaundrief , T.J. Martinp ,
                                                       M.F. Marzioniq , C. Maupinn , C.T. McConnellm , D.N. McKinseys,m , J. McLaughlinab , D.-M. Meiaa , Y. Mengy ,
                                                      E.H. Millera,b , Z.J. Minakerk , E. Mizrachii , J. Mockah,m , D. Molashj , A. Montep , M.E. Monzania,b , J.A. Moradk ,
                                                      E. Morrisonj , B.J. Mountal , A.St.J. Murphyq , D. Naimk , A. Naylorak , C. Nedlikag , C. Nehrkornaf , H.N. Nelsonaf ,
                                                  J. Nesbitf , F. Nevesw , J.A. Nikkell , J.A. Nikoleyczikf , A. Nilimaq , J. O’Delll , H. Ohac , F.G. O’Neilla , K. O’Sullivanm,s ,
                                                            I. Olcinah , M.A. Olevitchx , K.C. Oliver-Mallorym,s , L. Oxboroughf , A. Pagacf , D. Pagenkopfaf , S. Palw ,
                                                  K.J. Palladinof , V.M. Palmaccioi , J. Palmerai , M. Pangilinane , S.J. Pattonm , E.K. Peasem , B.P. Penningr , G. Pereiraw ,
                                                     C. Pereiraw , I.B. Petersonm , A. Piepkey , S. Piersona , S. Powello , R.M. Preecel , K. Pushkinc , Y. Qieac , M. Racinea ,
                                                     B.N. Ratcliffa , J. Reichenbacherj , L. Reichhartg , C.A. Rhynee , A. Richardsh , Q. Riffards,m , G.R.C. Rischbieterah ,
                                                      J.P. Rodriguesw , H.J. Roseo , R. Roseroae , P. Rossiterak , R. Rucinskip , G. Rutherforde , D. Ryndersn , J.S. Sabam ,
                                                          L. Sabarotsf , D. Santoneai , M. Sarychevp , A.B.M.R. Sazzady , R.W. Schneej , M. Schubnellc , P.R. Scovelll ,
                                                   M. Seversonf , D. Seymoure , S. Shawaf , G.W. Shutta , T.A. Shutta,b , J.J. Silki , C. Silvaw , K. Skarpaasa , W. Skulskiac ,
                                                      A.R. Smithm , R.J. Smiths,m , R.E. Smithf , J. Soj , M. Solmazaf , V.N. Solovovw , P. Sorensenm , V.V. Sosnovtsevd ,
                                                         I. Stancuy , M.R. Starkj , S. Stephensonk , N. Sterne , A. Stevensu , T.M. Stiegleram , K. Stiftera,b , R. Studleyr ,
                                                       T.J. Sumnerh , K. Sundarnathj , P. Sutcliffeo , N. Swansone , M. Szydagisah , M. Tanu , W.C. Taylore , R. Taylorh ,
                                                         D.J. Taylorn , D. Templesab , B.P. Tennysonv , P.A. Termanam , K.J. Thomasm , J.A. Thomsonk , D.R. Tiedti ,
                                                         M. Timalsinaj , W.H. Toa,b , A. Tomásh , T.E. Topep , M. Tripathik , D.R. Tronstadj , C.E. Tullm , W. Turnero ,
                                                   L. Tvrznikovav,s , M. Utesp , U. Utkug , S. Uvarovk , J. Va’vraa , A. Vachereth , A. Vaitkuse , J.R. Verbuse , T. Vietanenf ,
                                                    E. Voirinp , C.O. Vuosalof , S. Walcottf , W.L. Waldronm , K. Walkerf , J.J. Wangr , R. Wangp , L. Wangaa , Y. Wangac ,
                                                  J.R. Watsons,m , J. Migneaulte , S. Weatherlyi , R.C. Webbam , W.-Z. Weiaa , M. Whileaa , R.G. Whitea,b , J.T. Whiteam ,
                                                       D.T. Whiteaf , T.J. Whitisa,an , W.J. Wisniewskia , K. Wilsonm , M.S. Witherellm,s , F.L.H. Wolfsac , J.D. Wolfsac ,
                                                              D. Woodwardz , S.D. Worml , X. Xiange , Q. Xiaof , J. Xut , M. Yehae , J. Yinac , I. Youngp , C. Zhangaa
                                                                                   a
                                                                                      SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Menlo Park, CA 94025-7015, USA
                                                                b
                                                                    Kavli Institute for Particle Astrophysics and Cosmology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305-4085 USA
                                                                             c
                                                                               University of Michigan, Randall Laboratory of Physics, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1040, USA
                                                                               d
                                                                                 National Research Nuclear University MEPhI (NRNU MEPhI), Moscow, 115409, RUS


                                                  Preprint submitted to Elsevier                                                                                         November 5, 2019
                             e
                                           Brown University, Department of Physics, Providence, RI 02912-9037, USA
                      f
                              University of Wisconsin-Madison, Department of Physics, Madison, WI 53706-1390, USA
                    g
                      University College London (UCL), Department of Physics and Astronomy, London WC1E 6BT, UK
                            h
                              Imperial College London, Physics Department, Blackett Laboratory, London SW7 2AZ, UK
                                  i
                                    University of Maryland, Department of Physics, College Park, MD 20742-4111, USA
                                      j
                                        South Dakota School of Mines and Technology, Rapid City, SD 57701-3901, USA
                                  k
                                    University of California, Davis, Department of Physics, Davis, CA 95616-5270, USA
                                             l
                                               STFC Rutherford Appleton Laboratory (RAL), Didcot, OX11 0QX, UK
                                     m
                                        Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL), Berkeley, CA 94720-8099, USA
    n
      South Dakota Science and Technology Authority (SDSTA), Sanford Underground Research Facility, Lead, SD 57754-1700, USA
                                            o
                                               University of Liverpool, Department of Physics, Liverpool L69 7ZE, UK
                                        p
                                          Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory (FNAL), Batavia, IL 60510-5011, USA
                          q
                            University of Edinburgh, SUPA, School of Physics and Astronomy, Edinburgh EH9 3FD, UK
                                            r
                                              Brandeis University, Department of Physics, Waltham, MA 02453, USA
                            s
                              University of California, Berkeley, Department of Physics, Berkeley, CA 94720-7300, USA
                                   t
                                     Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL), Livermore, CA 94550-9698, USA
                                                u
                                                  University of Oxford, Department of Physics, Oxford OX1 3RH, UK
                                          v
                                            Yale University, Department of Physics, New Haven, CT 06511-8499, USA
   w
     Laboratório de Instrumentação e Fı́sica Experimental de Partı́culas (LIP), University of Coimbra, P-3004 516 Coimbra, Portugal
                         x
                           Washington University in St. Louis, Department of Physics, St. Louis, MO 63130-4862, USA
                        y
                          University of Alabama, Department of Physics & Astronomy, Tuscaloosa, AL 34587-0324, USA
                         z
                           Pennsylvania State University, Department of Physics, University Park, PA 16802-6300, USA
                 aa
                     University of South Dakota, Department of Physics & Earth Sciences, Vermillion, SD 57069-2307, UK
                       ab
                           Northwestern University, Department of Physics & Astronomy, Evanston, IL 60208-3112, USA
                      ac
                         University of Rochester, Department of Physics and Astronomy, Rochester, NY 14627-0171, USA
                                         ad
                                            University of Bristol, H.H. Wills Physics Laboratory, Bristol, BS8 1TL, UK
                                             ae
                                                 Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL), Upton, NY 11973-5000, USA
                  af
                     University of California, Santa Barbara, Department of Physics, Santa Barbara, CA 93106-9530, USA
                                 ag
                                     University of Massachusetts, Department of Physics, Amherst, MA 01003-9337, USA
                                 ah
                                     University at Albany (SUNY), Department of Physics, Albany, NY 12222-1000, USA
                              ai
                                 Royal Holloway, University of London, Department of Physics, Egham, TW20 0EX, UK
                                           aj
                                              IBS Center for Underground Physics (CUP), Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, KOR
                                ak
                                     University of Sheffield, Department of Physics and Astronomy, Sheffield S3 7RH, UK
                              al
                                 Black Hills State University, School of Natural Sciences, Spearfish, SD 57799-0002, USA
                 am
                     Texas A&M University, Department of Physics and Astronomy, College Station, TX 77843-4242, USA
                               an
                                    Case Western Reserve University, Department of Physics, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA




Abstract
    We describe the design and assembly of the LUX-ZEPLIN experiment, a direct detection search for cosmic WIMP
dark matter particles. The centerpiece of the experiment is a large liquid xenon time projection chamber sensitive to
low energy nuclear recoils. Rejection of backgrounds is enhanced by a Xe skin veto detector and by a liquid scintillator
Outer Detector loaded with gadolinium for efficient neutron capture and tagging. LZ is located in the Davis Cavern
at the 4850’ level of the Sanford Underground Research Facility in Lead, South Dakota, USA. We describe the major
subsystems of the experiment and its key design features and requirements.


1. Overview                                                            masses greater than a few GeV. The detector design and
                                                                       experimental strategy derive strongly from the LUX and
    In this article we describe the design and assembly of             ZEPLIN–III experiments [2, 3]. A Conceptual Design Re-
the LUX-ZEPLIN (LZ) experiment, a search for dark mat-                 port and a Technical Design Report were completed in
ter particles at the Sanford Underground Research Facil-               2015 and 2017, respectively [4, 5]. The projected cross-
ity (SURF) in Lead, South Dakota, USA. LZ is capable                   section sensitivity of the experiment is 1.5 × 10−48 cm2 for
of observing low energy nuclear recoils, the characteristic            a 40 GeV/c2 WIMP (90% C.L.) [6].
signature of the scattering of WIMPs (Weakly Interact-                     A cutaway drawing of the experiment is shown in Fig. 1.
ing Massive Particles). It is hosted in the Davis Cam-                 The LZ TPC monitors 7 active tonnes (5.6 tonnes fidu-
pus water tank at SURF, formerly the home of the LUX                   cial) of LXe above its cathode. Ionizing interactions in
experiment[1]. LZ features a large liquid xenon (LXe)                  the active region create prompt and secondary scintillation
time projection chamber (TPC), a well-established tech-                signals (‘S1’ and ‘S2’), and these are observed as photo-
nology for the direct detection of WIMP dark matter for                electrons (PEs) by two arrays of photomultiplier tubes

                                                                   2
                          4

                          3

                          2
                                                                                                               6
                          1



                          5




Figure 1: Rendering of the LZ experiment, showing the major detector subsystems. At the center is the liquid xenon TPC (1), monitored
by two arrays of PMTs and serviced by various cable and fluid conduits (upper and lower). The TPC is contained in a double-walled
vacuum insulated titanium cryostat and surrounded on all sides by a GdLS Outer Detector (2). The cathode high voltage connection is made
horizontally at the lower left (5). The GdLS is observed by a suite of 8” PMTs (3) standing in the water (4) which provides shielding for the
detector. The pitched conduit on the right (6) allows for neutron calibration sources to illuminate the detector.


(PMTs). The nature of the interaction, whether electronic                assembled and integrated into the ICV in a surface lab-
recoil (‘ER’) or nuclear recoil (‘NR’), is inferred from the             oratory cleanroom at SURF, with the ICV outer diame-
energy partition between S1 and S2. The location of the                  ter taking maximal advantage of the available space in the
event is measured from the drift time delay between S1                   Yates shaft. The OCV and OD, being larger than the ICV,
and S2 (z coordinate) and from the S2 spatial distribution               cannot be transported underground in monolithic form.
(x and y coordinates). The TPC is housed in an inner                     Therefore the OCV is segmented into three flanged com-
cryostat vessel (ICV), with a layer of ‘skin’ LXe acting as a            ponents and integrated and sealed in the Davis Campus
high voltage stand-off. The skin is separately instrumented              water tank, while the OD is subdivided into ten hermetic
with PMTs to veto gamma and neutron interactions in                      AVs. This architecture does not require any underground
this region. The ICV is suspended inside the outer cryo-                 titanium welding or acrylic bonding.
stat vessel (OCV), cooled by a set of LN thermosyphons,                      Besides the instrumented skin and OD, several other
and thermally isolated by an insulating vacuum. Both the                 design choices distinguish LZ from its LUX predecessor.
ICV and OCV are fabricated from low radioactivity ti-                    The cathode HV connection, for example, is made at a
tanium [7]. The cryostat stands inside the Davis Campus                  side port on the cryostat, while the PMT cables from the
water tank, which provides shielding from laboratory gam-                lower half of the TPC are pulled from the bottom. The
mas and neutrons. An additional set of PMTs immersed                     heat exchanger for LXe condensation, evaporation, and
in the water observe an Outer Detector (OD) comprised of                 circulation is located in a separate and dedicated cryostat
acrylic vessels (AVs) surrounding the cryostat. The AVs                  outside the water tank, with LXe being circulated to and
contain organic liquid scintillator loaded with Gadolinium               from the bottom of the detector through vacuum insu-
(GdLS) for efficient neutron and gamma tagging. The wa-                  lated transfer lines. To continuously reject heat from the
ter tank and OD are penetrated by various TPC services,                  LN thermosyphon systems, a cryocooler is installed above
including vacuum insulated conduits for LXe circulation,                 the water tank in the Davis Campus. This eliminates the
instrumentation cabling, neutron calibration guide tubes,                need to transport LN to the underground, except during
and the cathode high voltage (HV) connection.                            cryocooler maintenance and repair.
    One goal of the experimental architecture is to mini-                    The experimental strategy is driven by the need to con-
mize the amount of underground fabrication and assem-                    trol radon, krypton, and neutron backgrounds. Control of
bly of the various detector sub-systems. The LZ TPC is                   dust on all xenon-wetted parts is essential, since it can be

                                                                     3
an important source of radon. Kr is removed from the ven-
dor supplied xenon using an off-site charcoal chromatogra-
phy facility. This purification step takes place prior to the
start of underground science operations. Gamma back-
grounds are highly suppressed by the self-shielding of the
TPC, and by careful control and selection of detector ma-
terials. Neutrons from spontaneous fission and alpha cap-
ture on light nuclei are efficiently tagged and vetoed by
the OD and skin.


2. The Xenon Detector: TPC and Skin

    The Xenon Detector is composed of the TPC and its
Xe Skin Veto companion. The central TPC contains 7
tonnes of active LXe which constitutes the WIMP target.
This volume measures approximately 1.5 m in diameter
and height, and is viewed by two arrays of PMTs. The
liquid phase produces prompt S1 pulses. This is topped by
a thin layer of vapor (8 mm thick) where delayed S2 elec-
troluminescence light is produced from ionization emitted
across the surface. Around and underneath the TPC, the
Xe Skin detector contains an additional ∼2 tonnes of liq-
uid, also instrumented with PMTs. This space is required
for dielectric insulation of the TPC but it constitutes an
anti-coincidence scintillation detector in its own right. An
overview of the Xenon Detector is shown in Fig. 2.
    The design of the Xenon Detector optimizes: i) the
detection of VUV photons generated by both S1 and S2,
through carefully chosen optical materials and sensors both
in the TPC and the Xe Skin; and ii) the detection of ioniza-
tion electrons leading to the S2 response, through carefully
designed electric fields in the various regions of the TPC.
The hardware components involved in the transport and
detection of photons and of electrons in the detector are
described in Sections 2.1 and 2.3. Section 2.4 describes the
flow and the monitoring of the LXe fluid itself.

2.1. Optical Performance of the TPC
    Both the S1 and the S2 signals produced by particle
interactions consist of vacuum ultraviolet (VUV) photons
produced in the liquid and gas phases, respectively. It is
imperative to optimize the detection of these optical sig-
nals. For the S1 response, the goal is to collect as many
VUV photons as possible, as this determines the thresh-
old of the detector. This is achieved primarily by the
use of high quantum efficiency (QE) PMTs optimized for
this wavelength region, viewing a high-reflectance cham-
ber covered in PTFE, and by minimizing sources of photon      Figure 2: The assembled Xenon Detector. Upper panel labels: 1-
                                                              Top PMT array; 2-Gate-anode and weir region (liquid level); 3-Side
extinction in all materials. Good photocathode coverage       skin PMTs (1-inch); 4-Field cage; 5-Cathode ring; 6-Reverse field
is also essential. For the S2 response, the gain of the elec- region; 7-Lower side skin PMTs (2-inch); 8-Dome skin PMTs (2-
troluminescence process makes it easier to collect enough     inch). Lower panel photo by Matthew Kapust, Sanford Underground
photons even at the lowest energies, and the main design      Research Facility.
driver is instead to optimize the spatial resolution, espe-
cially for peripheral interactions.
                                                              detection of the VUV luminescence. The “-22” variant was
    The TPC PMTs are 3–inch diameter Hamamatsu R11410–
                                                              tuned for LZ in particular: both for ultra-low radioactiv-
22, developed for operation in the cold liquid xenon and
                                                              ity and for resilience against spurious light emission ob-
                                                                4
served at low temperature in previous variants [8]. The                   ated in the TPC. These are shown in Fig. 3. An upward-
average cold QE is 30.9% after accounting for the dual                    looking “bottom” array immersed in the liquid contains
photoelectron emission effect measured for xenon scintil-                 241 units arranged in close-packed hexagonal pattern. A
lation [9]. Key parameters were tested at low temperature                 downward-looking “top” array located in the gas phase
for all tubes, including pressure and bias voltage resilience,            features 253 units arranged in a hybrid pattern that tran-
gain and single photoelectron response quality, afterpuls-                sitions from hexagonal near the center to circular at the
ing and dark counts. These are critical parameters that                   perimeter. This design was chosen to optimize the posi-
directly influence the overall performance of the detector.               tion reconstruction of the S2 signal for interactions near
The procurement, radioassay and performance test cam-                     the TPC walls, a leading source of background in these
paign lasted for nearly three years. The PMTs are pow-                    detectors. The structural elements of the arrays are made
ered by resistive voltage divider circuits attached to the                from low-background titanium. These include a thin plate
tubes inside the detector. The voltage ladder is that rec-                reinforced by truss structures with circular cut-outs to
ommended by Hamamatsu, using negative bias to extract                     which the individual PMTs are attached. In the bottom
the signal near ground potential (two independent cables                  array this plate sits at the level of the PMT windows.
are used for signal and bias). The nominal operating gain                 The exposed titanium is covered with interlocking PTFE
of the PMTs is 3.5 × 106 measured at the end of the signal                pieces to maximize VUV reflectance. The PMTs are held
cables.                                                                   by Kovar belts near their mid-point and attached to this
                                                                          plate by thin PEEK rods. In the top array the struc-
                                                                          tural plate is located at the back of the tubes, and the
                                                                          gaps between PMT windows are covered with more com-
                                                                          plex interlocking PTFE pieces secured to the back plate.
                                                                          The array designs ensure that mechanical stresses induced
                                                                          by the thermal contraction of PTFE and other materials
                                                                          does not propagate significantly to the PMT envelopes. A
                                                                          number of blue LEDs (Everlight 264-7SUBC/C470/S400)
                                                                          are installed behind plastic diffusers between PMTs at the
                                                                          face of both arrays. These are used to help optimize and
                                                                          calibrate the PMT gains and the timing response of the
                                                                          detector. The assembly and transport of the PMT arrays
                                                                          required a robust QA process to prevent mechanical dam-
                                                                          age, dust contamination, and radon-daughter plate-out.
                                                                          At the center of this program were specially-designed her-
                                                                          metic enclosures that protected the arrays during assem-
                                                                          bly, checkout, transport and storage until assembly into
                                                                          the TPC at SURF.
                                                                              A key element of the optical systems is the ∼20 km
                                                                          of cabling used for PMT and sensor readout. A 50-Ohm
                                                                          coaxial cable from Axon Cable S.A.S. (part no. P568914Aˆ)
                                                                          was selected for electrical and radioactivity performance.
                                                                          This cable has a copper-made inner conductor and braid,
                                                                          and extruded FEP insulator and outer sleeve (1.3-mm
                                                                          nominal diameter). The 12 m span from the detector
                                                                          to the external feed-throughs means that signal attenu-
                                                                          ation, dispersion and cross-talk are important considera-
                                                                          tions. The individual cables were pre-assembled into bun-
Figure 3: Arrays of R11410–22 PMTs viewing the TPC. Upper panel:          dles which are routed together through two conduits that
front view of the top PMT array within its assembly and transporta-       carry the cables from the top and bottom of the detector.
tion enclosure. Note the circular PMT arrangement at the periph-          An additional consideration is the potential for radon em-
ery transitioning to compact hexagonal towards the center, and the        anation. This is especially important for the fraction of
coverage of non-sensitive surfaces by interlocking pieces of highly
reflective PTFE. Photo by Matthew Kapust, Sanford Underground             the cabling located near room temperature. Low intrinsic
Research Facility. Lower panel: Back view of bottom array PMTs            radioactivity of the cable materials can be easily achieved,
in hexagonal arrangement, showing cable connections and routing           but dust and other types of contamination trapped within
as well as 18 2-inch dome PMTs, which are part of the skin veto
                                                                          the fine braid during manufacture can be problematic. We
system. Also visible are the titanium support trusses and the LXe
distribution lines. Most surfaces are covered in PTFE to aid light        developed additional cleanliness measures with Axon to
collection.                                                               mitigate this and have opted for a jacketed version which
                                                                          acts as a further radon barrier. In addition, the xenon
   Two PMT arrays detect the xenon luminescence gener-                    flow purging the cable conduits is directed to the inline
                                                                      5
radon-removal system described in Sec. 3.2.                           pathology, the LZ field cage is designed to optically isolate
    After the PMTs, the next main optical component of                the skin from the TPC.
the detector is the PTFE that defines the field cage and                  The side region of the skin contains 4 cm of LXe at
covers the non-sensitive detector components. The optical             the top, widening to 8 cm at cathode level for increased
performance of the detector depends strongly on its VUV               standoff distance. This is viewed from above by 93 1–inch
reflectivity – VUV photons reflect several times off PTFE             Hamamatsu R8520-406 PMTs. These are retained within
surfaces before detection – and the radiopurity of this ma-           PTFE structures attached to the external side of the field
terial is also critical due to its proximity to the active vol-       cage, located below the liquid surface. At the bottom of
ume. We identified both the PTFE powder and process                   the detector a ring structure attached to the vessel con-
that optimized radiological purity and VUV reflectivity in            tains a further 20 2–inch Hamamatsu R8778 PMTs view-
liquid xenon during a long R&D campaign [10, 11]. The                 ing upward into this lateral region, as shown in Fig. 4.
PTFE selected was Technetics 8764 (Daiken M17 powder),
whose reflectivity when immersed in LXe we measured as
0.973 (>0.971 at 95% C.L.). Our data are best fitted by
a diffuse-plus-specular reflection model for this particular
material, which was tested using the procedures described
in Ref. [10]. Most PTFE elements were machined from
moulds of sintered material, while thinner elements are
‘skived’ from cast cylinders manufactured from the same
powder.
    Other factors influence the photon detection efficiency
(PDE) for S1 and S2 light in the TPC. These include pho-
ton absorption by the electrode grids (wires and ring hold-
ers) and absorption by impurities in the liquid bulk. With
realistic values for these parameters our optical model pre-
dicts a photon detection efficiency of around 12% for S1
light.
    The optical design of the S2 signal is optimized for
robust reconstruction of low energy events at the edge of
the TPC, in particular from the decay of Rn daughters de-
posited on the field cage wall, termed “wall events”. These
events may suffer charge loss, thus mimicking nuclear re-
coils [12]. If mis-reconstructed further into the active re-
gion, they can be a significant background. Our aim is
to achieve ∼106 :1 rejection for this event topology in the
fiducial volume. A detailed study of this issue led to the
adoption of a circular PMT layout near the detector edge,
with the final PMT row overhanging the field cage inner               Figure 4: Upper panel: CAD section of the TPC below the cathode
walls, an optimized distance between the top PMT ar-                  showing the location of the 2” bottom side skin (1) and lower dome
ray and the liquid surface, and an absorbing optical layer            (2) PMTs. Lower panel: Photograph showing the PTFE panelling
(Kapton foil) covering the lateral conical wall in the gas            attached to the ICV that ensures high reflectance in the skin region
                                                                      and the lower side skin PMT ring at the bottom of the vessel.
phase.
                                                                          The dome region of the skin at the bottom of the de-
2.2. The Xe Skin Detector
                                                                      tector is instrumented with an additional 18 2–inch R8778
    An important component of the Xenon Detector is the               PMTs. These are mounted horizontally below the bottom
Xe Skin, the region containing around 2 tonnes of LXe                 array, with 12 looking radially outward and 6 radially in-
between the field cage and the inner cryostat vessel. A               ward. To enhance light collection, all PMTs in that region
primary motivation for this liquid is to provide dielec-              and array truss structures are dressed in PTFE. Moreover,
tric insulation between these two elements. In addition               PTFE tiles line the ICV sides and bottom dome. To attach
to its electrical standoff function, it is natural to instru-         the PTFE lining, low profile titanium buttons designed to
ment this region for optical readout so that it can act as            minimize field effects were epoxied to the ICV wall with
a scintillation-only veto detector, especially effective for          MasterBond EP29LPSP cryogenic epoxy. Holes were ma-
gamma-rays. Also, if the skin were not instrumented,                  chined into the PTFE tiles to fit around the buttons, and
light from particle interactions or electrical breakdown in           PTFE washers were attached to the buttons with PTFE
this region could leak in to the TPC unnoticed and create             screws to secure the tiles in place. These are visible in
difficult background topologies. To further suppress this             Fig. 4.

                                                                  6
2.3. TPC Electrostatic Design                                              at the core of the feed-through system mounted on top
    The S2 signature detected from particle interactions                   of the water tank. The space between them is continu-
in the liquid xenon comes from the transport of ioniza-                    ously pumped to provide a vacuum guard, monitored by
tion electrons liberated by the recoiling nucleus or elec-                 a Residual Gas Analyzer. Located at room temperature
tron, and their subsequent emission into the gas phase                     and far from the detector, a leak-tight seal to the xenon
above the liquid, where the signal is transduced into a                    space can be reliably achieved and the feed-through mate-
second VUV pulse via electroluminescence. Great care is                    rials are not a radioactivity concern. Another key feature
required to ensure that the various electric field regions                 of the cathode HV system is the reliance on a single span
in the detector achieve this with high efficiency and with                 of polyethylene cable (Dielectric Sciences SK160318), con-
low probability for spurious responses. The LZ detector                    necting the power supply all the way to the cathode in the
is instrumented as a traditional three-electrode two-phase                 liquid xenon many meters away. This 150 kV-rated cable
detector, with cathode and gate wire-grid electrodes estab-                features a conductive polyethylene sheath and center core
lishing a drift field in the bulk of the liquid, and a separate            and contains no metal components, avoiding differential
extraction and electroluminescence region established be-                  contraction and thermal stress issues, and precluding the
tween the gate and an anode grid. The former sits 5 mm                     appearance of insulation gaps between the dielectric and
below the surface and the latter is 8 mm into the gas. The                 the sheath, which contract equally. The HV line ends in
nominal operating pressure of the detector is 1.8 bara. At                 a complex voltage-grading structure near the cathode grid
nominal fields, each electron emitted into the gas generates               ring where the conductive sheath splays away. This grades
∼820 electroluminescence photons.                                          the potential along the dielectric, preventing very high field
    The nominal 300 V/cm drift field established in the                    regions inside the detector. The maximum field in the liq-
active region of the detector requires application of an                   uid xenon is 35 kV/cm. This voltage grading system ends
operating voltage of −50 kV to the cathode grid, which                     in a bayonet connector that allows rapid engagement to
allows LZ to meet its baseline performance for particle                    the cathode ring during installation, minimizing exposure
discrimination. The design goal is −100 kV, the maxi-                      of the detector to radon.
mum operating voltage for the system. The system to                            Inside the ICV there is a significant insulation stand-
deliver the HV to the cathode grid contains some of the                    off distance of 4–8 cm between the field cage and the inner
highest fields in the detector. The HV is delivered from                   vessel, and there is no instrumentation or cabling installed
the power supply (Spellman SL120N10, 120 kV) via a                         along the length of the skin region, where the field is high
room-temperature feed-through and into a long vacuum-                      and the possibility of discharges and stray light production
insulated conduit entering the detector at the level of the                would be concerning. This region is instead optimized for
cathode grid, as shown in Fig. 5. Most of the system was                   optical readout, becoming an integral part of the LZ veto
tested to −120 kV in liquid argon, except for the flexible                 strategy.
component connecting the grading structure to the cath-                        The drift region is 145.6 cm long between cathode and
ode, for which a similarly-shaped part was tested in liquid                gate electrodes, and 145.6 cm in diameter, enclosed by a
argon to surface fields 30% higher than those needed to                    cylindrical field cage which defines the optical environment
meet the design goal.                                                      for scintillation light and shapes the electric field for elec-
                                                                           tron transport. The field cage is constructed of 58 layers
                                                                           of PTFE, which provides insulation and high reflectivity,
                                                                           with a set of embedded titanium electrode rings. The lay-
                                                                           ers are 25 mm tall, the Ti rings 21 mm tall, and each layer
                                                                           of PTFE is azimuthally segmented 24 times. Due to their
                                                                           proximity to the active volume, these are critical materials
                                                                           for LZ. The metal rings are made from the same batch of
                                                                           titanium used for the cryostat [7] (the PTFE is described
                                                                           above). A key design driver was to achieve a segmented
                                                                           field cage design: to prevent the excessive charge accumu-
                                                                           lation observed in continuous PTFE panels, and to better
                                                                           cope with the significant thermal contraction of PTFE be-
                                                                           tween ambient and low temperature. The field cage em-
                                                                           beds two resistive ladders connecting the metal rings, each
                                                                           with two parallel 1 GΩ resistors per section (the first step
                                                                           has 1 GΩ in parallel with 2 GΩ to tune the field close to
Figure 5: The interface of the high voltage system with the cathode.       the cathode ring). This ladder ensures a vertical field with
1-Polyethylene high voltage cable; 2-LXe displacer; 3-LXe space; 4-        minimal ripple near the field cage.
Stress cone; 5-Grading rings.                                                  The lower PMT array cannot operate near the high
                                                                           potential of the cathode and so a second, more compact
    The cable enters the xenon space through two o-rings                   ladder is required below that electrode. This reverse field
                                                                       7
Figure 6: The electron extraction region assembly on the loom. 1-Anode grid; 2-Gate grid. During TPC operations the anode is above the
LXe surface and the gate is below. The liquid level is registered to this assembly by three weir spillovers.


region (RFR) contains only 8 layers with two parallel 5 GΩ                                                            ◦
                                                                       Table 1: TPC electrode grid parameters (all 90 woven meshes).
resistors per section, and terminates 13.7 cm away at a
bottom electrode grid which shields the input optics of                     Electrode    Voltage     Diam.     Pitch      Num.
the PMTs from the external field.                                                           (kV)      (µm)     (mm)
    The electrode grids are some of the most challenging                    Anode          +5.75        100     2.5       1169
components of the experiment, both to design and to fab-
ricate. Mechanically, these are very fragile elements that                  Gate           −5.75         75     5.0       583
nonetheless involve significant stresses and require very                   Cathode        −50.0        100     5.0       579
fine tolerances for wire positioning. Besides optimizing                    Bottom          −1.5         75     5.0       565
the conflicting requirements of high optical transparency
and mechanical strength, electrical resilience was an addi-
tional major driver – spurious electron and/or light emis-                At the top of the detector, the electron extraction and
sion from such electrodes is a common problem in noble                electroluminescence region, which contains the gate-anode
liquid detectors [13, 14].                                            system, is one of its most challenging aspects (see Fig. 7.)
    The anode and gate grids are depicted in Fig. 6. All              It establishes the high fields that extract electrons from the
grids are made from 304 stainless steel ultra-finish wire [15]        liquid and then produce the S2 light. The quality of the S2
woven into meshes with a few mm pitch using a custom                  signal is strongly dependent on both the small- and large-
loom. Key parameters of the four LZ grids are listed in               scale uniformity achieved in this region. In particular, the
Table 1. Each wire is tensioned with 250 g weights on both            anode contains the finest mesh of any LZ grid (2.5 mm
ends, and the mesh is glued onto a holder ring. The glue,             pitch) as this drives the S2 resolution.
MasterBond EP29LPSP cryogenic epoxy, is dispensed by                      An important consideration was the electrostatic de-
a computer-controlled robotic system. It includes acrylic             flection of the gate-anode system. We have directly mea-
beads that prevent external stresses from being transferred           sured the deflection of the final grids as a function of
to the wire crossings. A second metal ring captures the               field using a non-contact optical inspection method. This
glued region, and the tensioning weights are released after           matches expectations from electrostatic and mechanical
curing. This woven mesh has several advantages over wires             modeling, and predicts a ∼1.6 mm decrease in the 13 mm
stretched in a single direction. The load on the ring set is          gap at the 11.5 kV nominal operating voltage. As a conse-
azimuthally uniform and purely radial, allowing the mass              quence the field in the gas phase varies from 11.5 kV/cm
of the rings to be minimized. The region of non-uniform               at the center to 10.1 kV/cm at the edge. The combined
field near the wires is smaller for a mesh, which improves            effect of field increase and gas gap reduction increases
the uniformity and hence energy resolution obtained in                the S2 photon yield by 5% at the center. This effect
the S2 channel. Finally, a mesh grid has lower field trans-           can be corrected in data analysis. The gate wires sus-
parency than stretched wires, resulting in a more uniform             tain the strongest surface fields of any cathodic element
overall drift field. To preserve high S2 uniformity, it is im-        in the detector ('52 kV/cm, with no grid deflection, and
portant that the woven mesh have uniform wire spacing.                '58 kV/cm with 1.6 mm combined gate/anode deflection).
The loom design included several features to achieve high                 A major QA program was implemented to ensure the
uniformity during fabrication, and great care was taken in            high quality of the grids throughout manufacture, clean-
subsequent grid handling to avoid displacing wires.                   ing, storage and transport, and to prevent damage and

                                                                  8
                                                                        ICV and return liquid to the purification circuit through
                                                                        a common vacuum-insulated transfer line.
                                                                            A variety of sensors monitor the behavior and perfor-
                                                                        mance of the TPC. Six Weir Precision Sensors (WPS) mea-
                                                                        sure the liquid level to within ≈20 µm in the gate-anode
                                                                        region. An additional WPS is installed in the lower dome
                                                                        to monitor filling and draining of the detector. Long level
                                                                        sensors (LLS) are installed in the LXe tower for providing
                                                                        information during detector filling and for monitoring dur-
                                                                        ing normal operation. RF loop antennae (LA) and acous-
                                                                        tic sensors (AS) monitor the electrostatic environment of
                                                                        the detector during electrode biasing and thereafter dur-
                                                                        ing operation. The combination of WPS and AS sensors
                                                                        will also be used to detect disturbances of the fluid system
                                                                        and especially the liquid surface, such as bubbling or drip-
                                                                        ping. These will be aided by dedicated resistors installed
                                                                        in the bottom array that will be used to create bubbles in
                                                                        the LXe so that their signature can be characterized. At
                                                                        the top of the detector, a hexapod structure connects the
                                                                        top PMT array to the ICV lid through six displacement
                                                                        sensors, allowing the displacement and tilt between these
                                                                        two elements to be measured to within 0.1 degrees. This is
                                                                        especially important to prevent major stresses arising dur-
                                                                        ing cool-down of the TPC. Finally, PT100 thermometers
                                                                        are distributed at both ends of the detector. By design, all
Figure 7: The electron extraction and electroluminescence region.       sensors and their cabling are excluded from the side skin
1-TPC PMT; 2-Anode grid; 3-Gate grid; 4-Weir; 5-Xe Skin PMT.
                                                                        region and other high electric field regions. All sensors
                                                                        are read out by dedicated electronics attached to flanges
dust contamination. A key feature of this program was                   enclosed in the signal breakout boxes.
a series of measurements of the high voltage behavior in
Xe gas of 1/10th scale and full scale prototype grids, and              3. Cryogenics and Xe Handling
the final cathode, gate and anode grids. Emission of sin-
gle electrons to a rate as low as ∼Hz was measured via an               3.1. Cryostat and cryogenics
S2-like electroluminescent signal with PMTs. These mea-                     The Xenon Detector and its LXe payload are contained
surements confirmed earlier work [14] showing that elec-                in the Inner Cryostat Vessel. The Outer Cryostat Vessel
tron emission is strongly reduced by passivation, thus the              provides its vacuum jacket. As shown in Fig. 8, the OCV
production gate grid was passivated in citric acid for 2                is supported at the bottom by three legs. The same as-
hours at ∼125◦ F at AstroPak [16].                                      sembly provides shelves for the GdLS AVs located under-
                                                                        neath the OCV. The ICV is suspended from the top head
2.4. Fluid Systems and Sensors                                          of the OCV with a mechanism enabling its levelling from
    Purified and sub-cooled LXe is prepared by the LXe                  above. Three long tubes run vertically to deploy calibra-
tower and delivered to the Xenon Detector through two                   tion sources into the insulating vacuum space between the
vacuum-insulated supply lines that connect at the ICV                   vessels (see Sec. 5). Both vessels were designed in com-
bottom center flange (see Sec. 3.2). One line flushes the               pliance with the ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code
lower dome and side skin, the other fans out through a                  Section VIII Div. 1.
manifold into seven PTFE tubes that penetrate the lower                     The ICV consists of a top head and a bottom vessel
PMT array and supply LXe to the TPC. The fluid returns                  connected by a large flange near the top. The maximum
to the external purification system by spilling over three              outer diameter of the ICV is constrained by the cross-
weirs that establish the liquid surface height. The weirs               section of the Yates shaft. Its tapered shape is to reduce
have 23.3 cm circumference, are uniformly spaced in az-                 the electric field near the cathode. The TPC structure is
imuth around the top of the TPC, and are mounted to the                 anchored to the bottom of the ICV through six dedicated
gate grid ring so that the liquid level is well registered to           ports in the dished end. Three angled ports below the
the location of the gate and anode grids. The weirs drain               main flange are provided for the LXe weir drain return
through three tubes that penetrate the ICV in the side                  lines. Two ports at the top head and the central port at
skin region and descend in the insulating vacuum space.                 the bottom are for the PMT and instrumentation cables.
The three lines are ganged together near the bottom of the              The high voltage port has been machined on the inside to

                                                                    9
form a curvature minimizing the electric field around the
cathode HV feed-through. Five plastic blocks are attached
to the tapered part of the ICV wall to prevent the ICV                     3
from swinging during a seismic event.
    The OCV consists of three segments in order to fit the
largest into the conveyance of the Yates shaft. A port in
the center of the top head hosts the low energy neutron                                                                   4
source deployed in a large tungsten “pig” (see Sec. 5). A
reinforcing ring allows the top AVs to rest on the OCV
head.                                                                      1
    The entire cryostat assembly is made out of a carefully
selected ultra-radiopure Grade-1 titanium sourced from a
single titanium supplier [7]. After a comprehensive mate-
rial search campaign, a 5 metric ton Titanium Gr-1 slab
was procured from Timet and used to fabricate all the
stock material required for the cryostat. Initially it was
cut into three pieces in order to roll the plates with mul-
tiple thicknesses, forge all the flanges, and the ports and
to draw the welding wires. The ICV and OCV were fab-                       2
ricated from this material at Loterios in Milan, Italy (see
Fig. 8). The cleaning and etching of the ICV and OCV is
described in Sec. 8.
    The ICV is maintained at its operating temperature
by a set of closed-loop thermosyphon heat pipes utilizing
nitrogen as the process fluid. The thermosyphons deliver
                                                                                                                          5
heat from the ICV to the Cryogen On Wheels (COW), a
bath of LN located above the water tank in the Davis Cav-
ern. A cryocooler, model SPC-1 from DH industries, re-
condenses the boil-off nitrogen from the COW and trans-
fers the heat to the chilled water system. During cry-
ocooler maintenance and repair, the COW can be filled
by transporting LN to the Davis Cavern from the surface.
Four 450 liter storage dewars located underground, act as          Figure 8: The ICV and OCV during a test assembly at Loterios in
an intermediate LN repository to enable this mode of op-           Italy, prior to cleaning and etching. The ICV is suspended from the
                                                                   top dome of the OCV. 1-ICV; 2-middle section OCV; 3-top dome
eration.                                                           section OCV; 4-ICV weir drain port; 5-OCV cathode high voltage
    Six copper coldheads are bolted to welded titanium             port.
fins on the ICV exterior and are serviced by three ther-
mosyphon lines. The coldheads are placed at a height
just below the LXe level. The cooling power of each ther-          detector with a TPC outgassing campaign described in
mosyphon is set by adjusting the amount of process nitro-          Sec. 7. The electron lifetime goal is 800 µs, sufficient to
gen in each circuit. Fine adjustment is provided by PID-           drift charge from the cathode to the anode while suffering
controlled trim heaters located on each coldhead. Two ad-          an acceptable signal reduction factor of 1/e.
ditional thermosyphon circuits remove heat from the LXe                An overview of the system is shown in Fig. 9. Xe
tower (see Sec. 3.2).                                              gas is pumped through a hot zirconium getter at a de-
    The total heat budget of the experiment is estimated           sign flow rate of 500 standard liters per minute (SLPM),
to be 700 W. The largest contributing item, at 349 W, is           taking 2.4 days to purify the full 10 tonne Xe inventory
due to the inefficiency of the primary two-phase xenon cir-        in a single pass. The getter, model PS5-MGT50-R from
culation heat exchanger. The thermosyphon trim heaters             SAES [17], operates at 400 ◦ C. For thermal efficiency, the
and the heat leak into the ICV each account for about              getter features a heat exchanger to couple the inlet and
115 W.                                                             outlet Xe gas streams, substantially reducing the 3 kW
                                                                   heat burden at 500 SLPM. A pre-heater ensures that the
3.2. Online Xe handling and purification                           gas strikes the getter bed at the operating temperature.
                                                                   Besides electronegative removal, the getter bed also serves
    The online Xe purification system continuously removes
                                                                   as a permanent repository for the tritium and 14 C radio-
electronegative impurities from the Xe while also provid-
                                                                   labeled methane species that calibrate the beta decay re-
ing some measure of Rn removal and control. Rejection
                                                                   sponse of the TPC (see Sec. 5).
of electronegatives begins during the final assembly of the
                                                                       Circulation flow is established by two all-metal diaphragm

                                                              10
                                                                                        Storage and Recovery


                                            Getter                            Radon Removal
                    Compressors
                                                                     Cable                                                       Cable
                                                                   Breakout                                                    Breakout




                                                                                                                   Xe Vapor
                        Liquid
                                                                                                           Weir
                        Xenon
                                       2 Phase HX




                        Tower
                                                                       Cable




                                                                                                                                                     Vacuum
                                                                                        Weir Drain Pipe
                                                                       Stand
                                                                                                            LXe-TPC




                                                                                                                                          LXe Skin
                                                                        Pipe
                                                       Reservoir




                                                                                                                                                              Cathode
                          Sub Cooler




                                                                                                                                                                High
                                                                                                                                                              Voltage



                       HX/                                                                                TPCPTFE
                     Gas Gap                                                                              Walls

                                          Cryovalves                                                        LXe Skin

                                                                                                                    Flow
                                                                                                                  Restrictor

                                                                                                                                                       Water Tank



Figure 9: Overview of the online Xe purification system. LXe in the Xenon Detector (right) spills over a weir drain and flows horizontally to
the Liquid Xenon tower, which stands outside the water tank. It is vaporized in a two phase heat exchanger, pumped through a hot zirconium
getter, and returned to the detector after condensing. Cryovalves control the flow of LXe between the LXe tower and the Xenon Detector. A
radon removal system treats Xe gas in the cable conduits and breakout feed-throughs before sending it to the compressor inlet.


gas compressors, model A2-5/15 from Fluitron [18]. The                                     stainless steel. On its other side, condensing LXe flows into
two compressors operate in parallel, each capable of 300                                   the subcooler vessel and subcooler HEX. The vessel sepa-
SLPM at 16 PSIA inlet pressure. The system operates                                        rates any remaining Xe gas from the LXe, while the HEX
with one compressor at reduced flow rate during peri-                                      cools the LXe to below its saturation temperature. The
odic maintenance. The total achieved gas flow is trimmed                                   HEX consists of three isolated elements: the LXe volume,
by a bellows-sealed bypass proportional valve, model 808                                   an LN thermosyphon coldhead cooled to 77 K, and a thin
from RCV. Both circulation compressors have two stages,                                    thermal coupling gap. The power delivered to the LXe can
each featuring copper seals plated onto stainless steel di-                                be varied from 90 W and 480 W by adjusting the compo-
aphragms. All-metal sealing technology was chosen to                                       sition of the He/N2 gas mixture in the gap. An additional
limit radon ingress from air.                                                              thermosyphon coldhead integrated with the reservoir re-
    The LXe tower is a cryogenic device standing on the                                    moves excess heat during cooldown and operations. Both
floor of the Davis Cavern outside the water tank and at a                                  the reservoir and the subcooler vessels are equipped with
height somewhat below the Xenon Detector. Its primary                                      LXe purity monitors (LPMs) to monitor electronegatives
purpose is to interface the liquid and gaseous portions of                                 entering and exiting the Xenon Detector. Each LPM is
the online purification circuit and to efficiently exchange                                a small, single-phase TPC which drifts free electrons over
heat between them. There are four vessels in the tower:                                    a distance, and measures the attenuation of the electrons
the reservoir vessel, the two-phase heat exchanger (HEX),                                  during that transit.
the subcooler vessel, and the subcooler HEX.                                                   LXe flows between the LXe tower and the Xenon De-
    The reservoir vessel collects LXe departing the Xenon                                  tector through three vacuum insulated transfer lines that
Detector via the weir system. It features a standpipe con-                                 run across the bottom of the Davis Cavern water tank.
struction to decouple its liquid level from that in the weir                               Two lines connect to the bottom of the ICV and supply
drain line. LXe flows from the bottom of the reservoir                                     sub-cooled LXe to the TPC and skin regions of the Xenon
into the two-phase HEX, where it vaporizes after exchang-                                  Detector. The third line returns LXe from the ICV weir
ing heat with purified Xe gas returning from the getter.                                   drain system to the reservoir. The lines are constructed
The two-phase HEX is an ASME-rated brazed plate de-                                        by Technifab with an integrated vacuum insulation jacket.
vice made by Standard Xchange consisting of corrugated                                     They are further insulated from the water by an additional

                                                                                   11
vacuum shell. Cryogenic control valves from WEKA reg-               Where possible, stainless steel components have been etched
ulate the LXe flow in each of the three lines.                      in citric acid to reduce radon emanation.
    Conduits connect to the ICV at its lower flange and
upper dome to service PMT and instrumentation cables to             3.3. Removal of Kr from Xe
the TPC. The lower conduit, which is vacuum insulated                    Beta decay of 85 Kr in the LXe is a challenging ER
and filled with LXe, travels across the water tank floor,           background source. The acceptable Kr concentration, de-
penetrates its side wall, and mates with a vertical LXe             rived by assuming an isotopic abundance of 85 Kr/Kr ∼
standpipe. Its cables emerge into gaseous Xe and then               2 × 10−11 , is Kr/Xe < 0.3 parts-per-trillion (g/g). This
connect to breakout feed-throughs at the standpipe top.             concentration is achieved prior to the start of LZ opera-
Two upper conduits filled with gaseous Xe connect the               tions by separating trace Kr from the Xe inventory with a
ICV top head to breakout feed-throughs and service cables           gas charcoal chromatography process.
to the upper part of the Xenon Detector.                                 A total of 800 kg of Calgon PCB activated charcoal is
    The Xe gas in the cable conduits and breakout feed-             employed, divided evenly into two columns. The charcoal
throughs are treated for radon removal by a cold synthetic          was washed with water to remove dust and baked under
charcoal column drawing 0.5 SLPM of Xe gas flow. The                an N2 purge for 10 days, ultimately achieving a charcoal
system is designed to sequester 222 Rn for three half-lives,        temperature of 150 ◦ C. During processing the Xe inven-
or 12.7 days, allowing 90% of these atoms to decay. The             tory is mixed with He carrier gas circulated by a compres-
sequestration is accomplished by a gas chromatographic              sor (model 4VX2BG-131 from RIX). The Xe/He mixture
process that employs 10 kilograms of synthetic charcoal             is passed through one of the two charcoal columns at a
(Saratech Spherical Adsorbent, Blücher GmbH) cooled to             pressure of 1.7 bara. Trace Kr reaches the column outlet
190 K [19]. The technique was previously demonstrated in            first and is directed to an LN-cooled charcoal trap where
Ref.[20]. The charcoal was etched in nitric acid and rinsed         it is retained. A Leybold-Oerlikon Roots blower and screw
with distilled water to reduce its radon emanation rate.            pump located at the charcoal column outlet then activates,
    Besides the LPMs, surveillance of the impurity content          dropping the column pressure to 10 mbar. This purges the
of the Xe is also provided by two coldtrap mass spectrom-           purified Xe from the column. The Xe is separated from the
etry systems [21, 22]. These devices monitor for the pres-          He carrier gas by freezing it at 77 K in an LN-cooled heat
ence of stable noble gas species such as 84 Kr and 40 Ar and        exchange vessel. This freezer is periodically warmed to va-
also for electronegatives such as O2 . Ten standard liter           porize the Xe ice, and the recovered Xe gas is transferred
samples of Xe gas are collected and passed through a cold-          at room temperature by a Fluitron Xe recovery compressor
trap cooled to 77 K, a temperature at which Xe is retained          to one of the twelve Xe storage packs described above.
while many impurities species pass through. The outlet of                The entire 10 tonne Xe inventory is processed in 16 kg
the coldtrap is monitored by a Residual Gas Analyzer (an            batches. The chromatographic and Xe purge cycles each
RGA200 from SRS). The sensitivity for detecting 84 Kr in            take about 2 hours. Two charcoal columns are employed to
Xe is better than 10 parts-per-quadrillion (g/g). The cold-         allow processing and column purging to proceed in paral-
trap is cooled either with a pulse tube refrigerator (model         lel. A Kr rejection factor greater than 1000 can be achieved
PT60 from Cryomech Inc.) or with an open flask dewar                in a single pass through the system; two passes are envi-
of liquid nitrogen. One of these systems is permanently             sioned to achieve the required concentration. The process-
plumbed to fixed locations in the Xe handling system; the           ing is monitored by a coldtrap Xe mass spectrometry sys-
other acts as a mobile utility system to be deployed as             tem for quality assurance. After processing, the Xe storage
needed. Both are highly automated and allow for multiple            packs are shipped from SLAC to SURF in preparation for
measurements per day.                                               condensing into the Xenon Detector.
    To recover the ten tonne Xe inventory to long term
storage, two high pressure gas compressors (Fluitron model
D1-20/120) pump Xe gas into 12 Xe storage packs. The                4. Outer Detector
recovery compressors use the same all-metal diaphragm
                                                                        The principal purpose of the Outer Detector is to tag
technology as the circulation compressors. Each Xe stor-
                                                                    neutrons scattering events in the TPC. Most neutrons orig-
age pack consist of 12 DOT-3AA-2400 49.1 liter cylinders
                                                                    inate from radioactive impurities in material immediately
sealed with Ceoduex D304 UHP tied diaphragm valves
                                                                    adjacent to the TPC, such as those from (α,n) processes
and ganged together in a steel frame. Each pack weighs
                                                                    on PTFE. The OD is a near-hermetic liquid scintillator
1,800 kg when full. During Xe recovery heat is added to
                                                                    detector designed to capture and tag neutrons within a
the LXe by electrical heaters and by softening the insulat-
                                                                    time window that allows the signals to be correlated with
ing vacuum of the lower cable conduit. Two backup diesel
                                                                    the NR in the TPC.
generators are provided in case of a power outage. The
                                                                        The detection medium for the OD is gadolinium-doped
emergency recovery logic is described in Sec. 6.3.
                                                                    liquid scintillator contained within segmented acrylic ves-
    All elements of the online Xe handling system were
                                                                    sels that surround the OCV. Neutrons are detected pre-
cleaned for ultra high vacuum with solvents and rinsed in
                                                                    dominantly through capture on 155 Gd and 157 Gd; a total of
de-ionized water. Orbital welds conform to ASME B31.3.
                                                               12
7.9 MeV (155 Gd) or 8.5 MeV (157 Gd) is released in a post-
capture cascade of, on average, 4.7 gammas. About 10% of
neutrons capture on hydrogen, emitting a single 2.2 MeV
gamma. Gammas induce scintillation within the LS which
is subsequently collected by the 120 8–inch PMTs that
view the OD from a support system inside the water tank.
To maximize light collection efficiency, there is both a
Tyvek curtain behind, above and below the PMTs, and
a layer of Tyvek surrounding the cryostat.
     The OD has been designed to operate with a neutron
detection efficiency of greater than 95%. To optimize this
efficiency, the concentration of Gd was chosen such that
capture on H is sub-dominant. Furthermore, the time be-
tween a signal in the TPC and a neutron capture in the OD
impacts the efficiency (see Fig. 10). The level of Gd chosen
for LZ reduces the average capture time of thermal neu-
trons in liquid scintillator from 200 µs to 30 µs. However,
there is a significant population of neutrons that survive
several times longer than 30 µs. Simulations demonstrate
that neutrons can spend significant time scattering and
thermalizing within the acrylic walls of the OD vessels. To
minimize this effect, the acrylic walls are designed to be as
thin as is structurally possible. Using less acrylic also re-
duces the number of H-captures. The use of a 500 µs time
window allows for an efficiency of 96.5% for a 200 keV
threshold, while achieving a deadtime of less than 5%.
 Inefficiency (%)




                    10                                0 keV
                                                      100 keV               Figure 11: The outer detector system in an exploded view. The
                    8                                 200 keV               four large side vessels are shown in green and the 5 smaller top and
                                                                            bottom vessels are shown in blue. Also shown are water displacers
                                                                            in red, and the stainless steel base in grey.
                    6

                    4                                                       0.5–inch thick, whereas the flat tops and bottoms are 1–
                                                                            inch thick for structural reasons. The AVs contain various
                    2                                                       penetrations for conduits and cabling. All sheets of acrylic
                                                                            used for fabrication were tested for optical transmission
                     0   200   400     600        800          1000         and were found to exceed 92% between 400 and 700 nm,
                                              OD Veto Window ( s)           meeting requirements. Acrylic samples were screened with
                                                                            ICP-MS (see Sec. 8.1)and found to be sufficiently low in
Figure 10: Monte Carlo derived OD inefficiency as a function of veto        radioactive contaminants.
window (time between S1 in the TPC and signal in the OD). The
energy thresholds referenced in the legend are for electron recoils.
                                                                                The liquid scintillator used in the OD consists of a lin-
                                                                            ear alkyl benzene (LAB) solvent doped at 0.1% by mass
                                                                            with gadolinium. The full chemical make-up of the GdLS
4.1. Outer Detector systems                                                 cocktail is shown in Table 2. Gd is introduced into LAB us-
                                                                            ing trans-3-Methyl-2-hexenoic acid (TMHA) as a chelation
    A total of ten ultra-violet transmitting (UVT) Acrylic
                                                                            agent. Other components are the fluor, 2,5-Diphenyloxazole
Vessels have been fabricated by Reynolds Polymer Tech-
                                                                            (PPO), and a wavelength shifter, 1,4-Bis(2-methylstyryl)-
nology in Grand Junction, Colorado. These consist of four
                                                                            benzene (bis-MSB). The emission spectrum of this mix
side vessels, three bottom vessels, two top vessels and a
                                                                            spans 350 to 540 nm, with peaks at 400 and 420 nm, and
‘plug‘ which can be removed for photoneutron source de-
                                                                            the absorption length in this range is of order 10 m. LAB,
ployment, see Fig. 11. The AVs were designed as seg-
                                                                            TMHA and PPO are purified in order to remove metallic
mented to allow transport underground and into the water
                                                                            and coloured impurities to improve optical transmission;
tank with no acrylic bonding necessary on site. All acrylic
                                                                            LAB and TMHA by thin-film distillation and PPO by
walls for the side AVs are nominally 1–inch thick. For the
                                                                            water-extraction and recrystallization. For the chelated
top and bottom AVs, the side and domed acrylic walls are
                                                                            Gd product, a self-scavenging method is used to induce

                                                                       13
precipitation of uranium and thorium isotopes to improve             and significant findings of the LS Screener were the domi-
radiopurity. Twenty-two tonnes of GdLS contained in 150              nance of the rate from nuclides within the 235 U chain, and
55-gallon drums are shipped to SURF and transferred into             the presence of 176 Lu, now known to be introduced when
the AVs through a reservoir. Exposure to air is minimized,           doping with gadolinium, since neither were observed in
as oxygen, radon and krypton negatively impact the GdLS              the unloaded LS sample. A more aggressive purification
performance. The GdLS is bubbled with nitrogen while                 of the GdLS resulted in a decrease in activity of almost
in the reservoir in order to remove dissolved oxygen and             all contaminants. The new, lower activities were used in
maximize the light yield. Furthermore, a light yield test is         combination with the LS Screener results to predict a rate
performed on each drum of GdLS before transfer into the              of 5.9 Hz above the nominal 200 keV veto threshold for
AVs. The test apparatus consists of a dark box containing            the OD.
a radioactive source, one PMT, and a small sample of the                 The biggest contribution to the rate in the OD is from
GdLS.                                                                the radioactivity within the Davis Cavern. Contamination
    A total of 120 Hamamatsu R5912 8–inch PMTs view                  of the cavern walls with on the order of tens of Bq/kg for
                                                                     40
the GdLS and AVs from a Tyvek curtain situated 115 cm                   K, 238 U and 232 Th has been established using dedicated
radially from the outer wall of the acrylic (see Fig. 1). The        measurements of the γ-ray flux with a NaI detector [24],
interaction rate in the OD from radioistopes in the PMT              and simulation studies suggest a rate above 200 keV of
system is predicted to be only 2.5 Hz due to the shielding           27 ± 7 Hz, concentrated in the top and bottom AVs.
provided by the water gap. The PMTs are arranged in 20                   With an expected overall rate of ∼50 Hz, the OD can
ladders spaced equally around the water tank in φ with 6             be expected to operate with an efficiency of 96.5% for a
PMTs per ladder. Each PMT is held by a ‘spider’ support              200 keV threshold. The energy threshold of the OD is
and covered by a Tyvek cone.                                         nominally a number of photoelectrons corresponding to
    A dedicated Optical Calibration System (OCS) has                 an energy deposit of 200 keV, predicted to be 10 PE by
been designed for PMT monitoring and measurement of                  photon transport simulations. The threshold is chosen to
the optical properties of the GdLS and acrylic. Thirty               eliminate the rate from internal 14 C contamination, as it
LED duplex optical fibres are mounted with the PMT                   is a low energy β-decay with an endpoint of 156 keV. The
supports, with an additional five beneath the bottom AVs             OD may be operated instead with a 100 keV threshold,
placed specifically to check transmission through the acrylic.       depending on the observed rate, which would decrease the
Short, daily calibrations with the OCS will be performed             inefficiency at a window of 500 µs from 3.5% to 2.8%.
in order to check the PE/keV yield at the veto threshold,                The impact of the OD on NR backgrounds is charac-
and weekly calibrations will be used to check PMT gains              terized through neutron Monte Carlo simulations. The
and optical properties.                                              total NR background in 1000 livedays is predicted to be
                                                                     reduced from 12.31 to 1.24 NR counts when the OD and
4.2. Performance                                                     skin vetoes are applied, with the OD providing most of
    The performance of the OD strongly depends on its                the vetoing power. Due to the spatial distribution of these
event rate. The sources can be divided into internal and             NRs in the LXe TPC, the OD is necessary to utilize the
external; internal backgrounds are contamination intrinsic           full 5.6 tonne fiducial volume.
to the OD, i.e. inside the GdLS; while external sources
can be subdivided again into radioactivity from LZ com-
                                                                     5. Calibrations
ponents and radioactivity from the Davis Cavern itself (see
Table 3).                                                                Many attributes of the LZ detector response require
    Radioactive contaminants internal to the GdLS have               in situ calibration. Calibration goals range from low-level
been measured through a campaign with an LS Screener, a              quantities such as PMT gain and relative timing to high-
small detector containing 23 kg of liquid scintillator viewed        level quantities such as models of electron recoil and nu-
by three low background LZ PMTs, fully described in                  clear recoil response. To these ends, the LZ detector in-
Ref. [23]. The LS Screener took data with both loaded                cludes significant accommodations for a suite of calibra-
(with Gd) and unloaded (no Gd) samples of the liquid                 tions. Large-scale accommodations (some visible in Fig. 1)
scintillator that is used in the Outer Detector. The un-             include three small-diameter conduits to transport exter-
loaded sample allowed a clear determination of what con-             nal sources to the cryostat side vaccum region, one large-
taminants were introduced during the Gd-doping process,              diameter conduit to transport large (γ,n) sources to the
as well as a clearer low energy region to allow a measure-           cryostat top, and two evacuated conduits to enable neu-
ment of the 14 C concentration, particularly important as            tron propagation from an external neutron generator to
its rate influences the choice of energy threshold. Use of           the cryostat side.
pulse shape discrimination allowed for efficient separation
of alpha decays from betas and gammas, and constraints               5.1. Internal sources
were placed on activity from the 238 U, 235 U and 232 Th
                                                                        Gaseous sources can mix with the LXe in order to reach
decay-chains, 40 K, 14 C, 7 Be (from cosmogenic activation
                                                                     the central active volume, where self-shielding limits cali-
of carbon in the LS), 85 Kr and 176 Lu. Some surprising
                                                                14
                                          Table 2: Chemical components in 1 L of GdLS.
            Acronym               Molecular Formula                     Molecular Weight (g/mol)               Mass (g)
              LAB                      C17.14 H28.28                              234.4                         853.55
              PPO                       C15 H11 NO                                221.3                           3.00
            bis-MSB                       C24 H22                                 310.4                          0.015
             TMHA                        C9 H17 O2                                157.2                           2.58
               Gd                           Gd                                    157.3                           0.86
              GdLS        C17.072 H28.128 O0.0126 N0.0037 Gd0.0015                233.9                          860.0



Table 3: Predictions for the event rate in the Outer Detector.        Table 4: Overview of radioactive nuclide sources planned for LZ
Rates are given in the case of the nominal 200 keV threshold.         calibration, grouped according to deployment method. A: gaseous
         Type       Component        OD Rate (Hz)                     sources released into GXe circulation, B: sealed sources lowered down
                    PMTs & Bases         0.9                          small-diameter conduits to cryostat side vacuum, C: (γ,n) sources
                    TPC                  0.5                          requiring dense shielding, lowered down a large-diameter conduit to
                    Cryostat             2.5                          the cryostat top, D: DD generator sources, in which neutrons travel
         External                                                     through conduits from the generator, through the water tank and
                    OD                   8.0
                    Davis Cavern         31                           outer detector.
         Internal   GdLS                 5.9                                  Nuclide       Type       Energy [keV]            τ1/2
         Total                           51                                   83m
                                                                                  Kr        γ          32.1 , 9.4              1.83 h
                                                                              131m
                                                                                   Xe       γ          164                     11.8 d
                                                                              220
bration via external gamma sources. The baseline suite of               A         Rn        α, β, γ    various                 10.6 h
                                                                              3
such ‘internal’ sources is listed in Group A of Table 4.                        H           β          18.6 endpoint           12.5 y
                                                                              14
     Long-lived gaseous sources (3 H, 14 C) can be stored as                     C          β          156 endpoint            5730 y
                                                                              241
a pressurized gas, with purified Xe serving as the carrier.                       AmLi      (α,n)      1500 endpoint (a)       432 y
Because the nuclide is long-lived, it must be in a chemi-                     252
                                                                                  Cf        n          Watt spectrum           2.65 y
cal form that can be efficiently removed by the getter (see                   241
                                                                                  AmBe      (α,n)      11,000 endpoint         432 y
Sec. 3.2). The LZ implementation builds on the successful                     57
                                                                                 Co         γ          122                     0.74 y
example of LUX, in which isotopically-labeled CH4 served                      228
                                                                        B         Th        γ          2615                    1.91 y
as the calibration gas. CH4 was seen to be efficiently re-                    22
                                                                                 Na         γ          511,1275                2.61 y
moved, as long as it did not contain trace amounts of other                   60
labeled hydrocarbons [25, 26].                                                   Co         γ          1173 , 1333             5.27 y
                                                                              133
     The short-lived gaseous sources (83m Kr, 131m Xe, 220 Rn)                    Ba        γ          356                     10.5 y
                                                                              54
are stored in the form of their parent nuclide, which can                        Mn         γ          835                     312 d
                                                                              88
be handled and stored in a compact solid form and placed                         YBe        (γ,n)      152                     107 d
within ‘generator’ plumbing in which it emanates the cal-                     124
                                                                        C         SbBe      (γ,n)      22.5                    60.2 d
ibration daughter. 83 Rb serves as the parent nuclide of                      205
                                                                                  BiBe      (γ,n)      88.5                    15.3 d
83m
     Kr, and is deposited in aqueous solution on high pu-                     206
                                                                                  BiBe      (γ,n)      47                      6.24 d
rity, high surface area charcoal before baking (as in [27]).
131                                                                     D     DD            n          2450                    −
    I serves as the parent nuclide of 131m Xe, and is com-
mercially available in a pill form of high Xe emanation ef-                   D Ref.        n          272 → 400               −
ficiency. 228 Th serves as the parent nuclide of 220 Rn, and
is available commercially from Eckert & Ziegler as a thin
                                                                      HFC-D-302B) and volumes of precise pressure measure-
electroplated film for optimal Rn emanation. In the LZ
                                                                      ment (MKS 872). Once a dose of calibration gas has been
implementation, these generator materials are housed in
                                                                      isolated, the volume containing the dose is flushed into the
transportable and interchangeable plumbing sections (see
                                                                      main GXe circulation flow path, either before the getter
Fig. 12). These assemblies contain both a port for material
                                                                      for noble-element calibration species or after the getter for
access and a pair of sintered nickel filter elements (3 nm
                                                                      long-lived CH4 -based species.
pore size, Entegris WG3NSMJJ2) to prevent contamina-
tion by the parent nuclide of the active Xe.
                                                                      5.2. External sources
     Both long-lived and short-lived gaseous sources require
precise dose control on the injected activity, accomplished               External sources are lowered through three 23.5 mm
via a gas handling system dedicated to injection control.             ID 6 m long conduits to the vacuum region between the
A specific GXe cylinder supplies the carrier gas to trans-            ICV and OCV. Each conduit is capped by a deployment
port small quantities of calibration gas through a series of          system (Fig. 13) which raises and lowers the sources with
high-precision Mass Flow Controllers (Teledyne-Hastings               final position accuracy of ±5 mm. The position measure-
                                                                      ment is accomplished via an ILR1181-30 Micro-Epsilon
                                                                 15
                                                                                Figure 13: LEFT: One of three external source deployment systems,
                                                                                including the laser ranging system (top black component) and the
                                                                                stepper motor and gear/winding assembly (enclosed in a KF50 Tee
                                                                                at the back). A transparent plate makes visible the region in which
                                                                                the sources are installed and removed. RIGHT: An external source
                                                                                assembly, showing the acrylic body, the source region (at bottom),
                                                                                and the filament connection, black skids, and laser reflector (at top).


                                                                                up to about 4.6 keV. This range corresponds to the ex-
Figure 12: TOP: Three example solid materials containing parent                 pected energy depositions from 8 B solar neutrino coherent
nuclides that emit daughter calibration gaseous sources. Charcoal               scattering. Only about one neutron is produced for every
              83
dosed with Rb is fixed to the a 1/2-inch VCR plug (1). A gas-
                                 131                                            104 gammas emitted, so a significant quantity of gamma
permeable pill (2) containing        I and a disk source (3) of electro-
        228                                                                     shielding is required (see Fig. 14). The neutrons are quasi
plated      Th can also be fixed in place. BOTTOM: Photograph of
a typical gaseous source generator. Carrier Xe gas flows from left              mono-energetic at production (within a few percent) but
to right. The active parent material is stored in the central region            undergo additional scatterings before they reach the liq-
(4), accessed via a 1/2-inch VCR port. This region is bounded by a              uid xenon. The utility of this calibration source is derived
pair of filter elements (5) of 3 nm pore size sintered nickel and then
                                                                                from the endpoint energy the neutron deposits, which sim-
a pair of lockable manual valves for isolation during shipping and
installation.                                                                   ulations indicate will be clearly distinguishable after a few
                                                                                days of calibration.
                                                                                    A ∼140 kg tungsten shield block is designed to be de-
laser ranger (visible at the top of Fig. 13), supplying live                    ployed at the top of LZ via a crane. In the unlikely event
data for an active feedback protocol to a SH2141-5511                           the shield block were to become lodged inside the LZ water
(SANYO DENKO Co) stepper motor. A ∼100 µm nylon                                 tank, it would be possible to separately remove the conical
composite filament suspends the sources, rated to a maxi-                       structure which contains the gamma source and the Be.
mum load of 12 kg. The external sources themselves are in
most cases commercial sources (Eckert & Ziegler type R).                        5.4. Deuterium-deuterium neutron sources
A special case is the AmLi source, custom fabricated but
                                                                                     An Adelphi DD-108 deuterium-deuterium (DD) neu-
of the same form factor. To enable smooth transport up
                                                                                tron generator produces up to 108 neutrons per second. A
and down the conduit, each source is epoxied and encap-
                                                                                custom upgrade will allow up to 109 n/s. The neutrons
sulated at the lower end of a 5” long by 0.625” diameter
                                                                                are delivered through the Davis Cavern water tank and
acrylic cylinder. The top end contains the capsule holder
                                                                                Outer Detector via dedicated neutron conduits. There are
allowing connection to the filament and includes a ferro-
                                                                                two sets of conduits, one level and one inclined at 20 de-
magnetic connection rod for recovery in case of filament
                                                                                grees from the horizontal. Each conduit assembly includes
breakage.
                                                                                a 2–inch diameter and a 6–inch diameter path, and all are
                                                                                filled with water during dark matter search. As shown in
5.3. Photoneutron sources
                                                                                Fig. 14, the generator is permanently mounted on an Ekko
    A selection of photoneutron (γ,n) sources, including                        Lift (model EA15A), and surrounded by custom neutron
88
  YBe, 124 SbBe, 204 BiBe and 205 BiBe, are planned to cal-                     shielding material. A kinematic mounting plate, located
ibrate the nuclear recoil energy range from below 1 keV                         between the forks of the lift, will bolt to threaded inserts

                                                                           16
in the concrete floor. This is designed to provide precise,                  with neutron capture on Gd, which generates a γ-ray cas-
repeatable positioning.                                                      cade with a total energy between 7.9 and 8.5 MeV, do not
    The DD-108 produces 2450 keV mono-energetic neu-                         saturate the analog and digital electronics. Such events
trons. This source has already been used by LUX to ob-                       generate at most 100 PEs in a single PMT. For muon in-
tain a precise, in-situ calibration of the low-energy nuclear                teractions in the outer detector, a few PMTs may saturate,
recoil response [28]. In addition to this mode of operation,                 depending on the location of the muon track.
LZ obtains 272 keV quasi mono-energetic neutrons by re-                          The Data Acquisition system (DAQ) is designed to al-
flecting the 2450 keV beam from a deuterium oxide (D2 O)                     low LED calibrations of the TPC PMTs in about 10 min-
target. This allows the lowest nuclear recoil energies to be                 utes. This requires an event rate of 4-kHz, resulting in a
calibrated with decreased uncertainty.                                       ∼340 Mb/s total waveform data rate. Monte Carlo sim-
                                                                             ulations predict a total background rate is about 40 Hz.
                                                                             The background rate between zero and 40 keV is about
                                                                             0.4 Hz. Due to the maximum drift time of 800 µs in the
                                                                             TPC, the rate for TPC source calibrations is limited to
                                                                             150 Hz. A 150 Hz calibration rate results in a 10% prob-
                                                                             ability of detecting a second calibration event within the
                                                                             drift time of the previous calibration event.
                                                                                 The slow control system is responsible for controlling
                                                                             and monitoring all LZ systems. It is described in detail in
                                                                             Sec. 6.3.

                                                                             6.1. Signal Flow
                                                                                 The processing of the signals generated by the TPC
Figure 14: LEFT: Brass mockup of the photoneutron source shield-             PMTs is schematically shown in Fig. 15. The TPC and
ing assembly, which will be made of tungsten alloy. The main body            skin PMTs operate at a negative HV, supplied by the HV
is at top. Depicted below is a conical insert that houses radioactive        system, using MPOD EDS 20130n 504 and MPOD EDS
source. RIGHT: Rendering of the DD generator in its boron-doped
shielding assembly, all mounted on a movable positioning system.
                                                                             20130p 504 HV distribution modules from from WIENER
                                                                             Power Electronics [29]. HV filters are installed at the HV
                                                                             flange on the breakout box. The PMT signals leave the
                                                                             breakout box via a different flange and are processed by
6. Electronics and Controls                                                  the analog front-end electronics. The amplified and shaped
                                                                             signals are connected to the DAQ. The digitized data are
    The signal processing electronics, described in detail in
                                                                             sent to Data Collectors and stored on local disks. The
Sec. 6.1, processes the signals from 494 TPC PMTs, 131
                                                                             PMTs of the outer-detector system operate at positive HV.
skin PMTs, and 120 outer-detector PMTs. The electronics
                                                                             The same type of amplifier used for the TPC and skin
is designed to ensure a detection efficiency for single pho-
                                                                             PMTs is also used for the outer-detector PMTs.
toelectrons (PEs) of at least 90%. The PMT signals are
digitized with a sampling frequency of 100 MHz and 14-bit                                                                                                         External Triggers
accuracy. The gain and shaping parameters of the ampli-
                                                                                                 Low/High Gain Amp




                                                                                                                                 Data Extractors




fiers are adjusted to optimize the dynamic range for the
                                                                                                                                                     DAQ Master



                                                                                                                                                                   Level 1 DS



                                                                                                                                                                                DS Master
                                                                                                                     DDC-32s




PMTs. The dynamic range for the TPC PMTs is defined
by the requirement that the S2 signals associated with a
full-energy deposition of the 164 keV 131m Xe activation
line do not saturate the digitizers. Larger energy deposi-
tions will saturate a number of channels of the top PMT                           PMTs
array, but the size of the S2 signal can be reconstructed
                                                                                                                                                                                Event Building
                                                                                                                     HV Supply
                                                                                                  HV Filter




using the S2 signals detected with the bottom PMT array.
                                                                                                                                                     Data
The saturation of a few top PMTs for S2 signal will not                                                                                            Collectors
impact the accuracy of the position reconstruction. For                          Xenon Space
the skin PMTs, the dynamic range is defined by the re-
quirement that the skin PMT signals associated with the
interaction of a 511-keV γ-ray in the skin do not saturate                   Figure 15: Schematic of the signal processing of the TPC PMTs.
                                                                             The TPC and outer-detector PMTs use dual-gain signal processing.
the digitizers. Simulations show that such an interaction                    The skin PMTs only utilize the high-gain section of the amplifiers.
can generate up to 200 PEs in a single PMT, depending                        The signals are digitized using the DDC-32 digitizer, developed for
on the location of the interaction. The dynamic range                        LZ in collaboration with SkuTek [30]. Event selection is made by
                                                                             the Data Sparsification (DS) system [31].
for the outer-detector PMTs is defined by the requirement
that the size of the outer-detector PMT signals associated

                                                                        17
                                                                              Counts (#)
    The PMT signals are processed with dual-gain am-
plifiers. The low-gain channel has a pulse-area gain of              300
four and a 30-ns full width at tenth maximum (FWTM)                  250
shaping-time constant. The high-gain channel has a pulse-
area gain of 40 and a shaping time of 60-ns (FWTM). The              200
high-gain channel is optimized for an excellent single PE
                                                                     150
response. The shaping times and gains are derived from
one assumption: the DAQ has a usable dynamic range of                100
1.8 V at the input. A 0.2 V offset is applied to the digitizer
channels in order to measure signal undershoots of up to              50
0.2 V. Measurements with prototype electronics and the
                                                                                   100            200          300        400          500
LZ PMTs have shown that the same amplifier parameters                                              Four sample wide S1 Filter peak output (ADCC)
can be used for all of them. For the TPC and the Outer
Detector PMTs, both high-gain and low-gain channels are         Figure 16: Measurements of the TPC PMT response to a single PE.
digitized; for the skin PMTs, only the high-gain channel        The output of the four-sample wide S1 filter, in units of ADC Counts
is digitized.                                                   (ADCC), is shown.
    The top-level architecture of the DAQ system is shown
schematically in Fig. 15. The DDC-32s digitizers, evel-                         CPU                                      Tape
                                                                   DAQ 1     DAQM + DQM                                Archive
oped for LZ in collaboration with SkuTek [30], continu-
ously digitize the incoming PMT signals and store them                               x% of Data

in circular buffers. When an interesting event is detected,
                                                                                 CPU                                                      Data
the Data Extractors (DE) collect the information of inter-         DAQ 15    Event Building
                                                                                                  Event
                                                                                                  Files
                                                                                                              RAID
                                                                                                             Surface
                                                                                                                        RAID
                                                                                                                        US DS
                                                                                                                                     (Re)processing
est from the DDC-32s. The DEs compress and stack the                                                                                   Simulations
extracted data using their FPGAs and send the data to
                                                                                                                                          Data
Data Collectors for temporary storage. The Event Builder                                                                             (Re)processing

takes the data organized by channels and assembles the                                         SURF           SURF      RAID
                                                                                           Underground       Surface    UK DS          Simulations
buffers into full event structures for online and offline anal-
ysis. The DAQ operation is controlled by the DAQ Master                      Figure 17: A schematic of the LZ data flow.
for high-speed operations such as system synchronization
and waveform selection, and by the DAQ Expert Con-
trol/Monitoring system, not shown in Fig. 15, for slow               Redundant connections exist between the surface and
operations such as running setup/control and operator di-       the  Davis Cavern. A pair of managed 10 Gbs switches is
agnostics. The entire system runs synchronously with one        installed   on the surface and underground. Each switch on
global clock.                                                   the  surface   is connected via two fibers, travelling through
    The performance of the entire signal processing chain       the  Yates    and    the Ross shafts, to the two underground
has been evaluated in an electronics chain test. Pre-production switches.    Since    each link supports 10 Gbs, this configura-
prototypes of the analog and digital as well as signal ca-      tion  can  support        data transfer rates of up to 40 Gbs.
bles of the same type and length as those to be installed            A  fraction   of   the     data is analyzed online by the Detec-
at SURF were used. The measured response of a four-             tor  Quality    Monitor         (DQM), running on a dedicated on-
sample wide S1 filter is shown in Fig. 16. The measured         line  server,  installed        in  the Davis Laboratory. The DQM
single photoelectron (PE) efficiency is 99.8%, much better      applies   elements       of   the    offline analysis to the data being
than the requirement of 90%. The threshold at which the         collected,   in  order      to   monitor      the performance of the de-
                                                                                                          83m
false-trigger rate is 1 Hz is 43 ADC Counts (ADCC) or           tector.   For  example,         during          Kr calibrations, the DQM
16% of a single PE.                                             will  monitor     the     electron      life  time   and the energy reso-
                                                                lution. Various detector parameters, such as PMT mul-
6.2. Data Flow and Online Data Quality                          tiplicity, hit distributions across both PMT arrays, and
    The data flow is schematically shown in Fig. 17. Five       trigger rates, will be monitored. If significant deviations
event builders (EB) assemble the events by extracting the       from prior observed patterns are seen, experts will be au-
relevant information from the Data Collector disks, DAQ1-       tomatically notified via the slow control system.
DAQ15. A 10 Gigabit per second (Gbs) line connects the
                                                                             6.3. Controls
Data Collectors to the Event Builders. The event files are
stored on the 16 TB local disk array of each EB, before                          The Controls system performs supervisory control and
being transferred to the 192 TB RAID array installed on                      monitoring of all the major subsystems of the experiment,
the surface. From there, the event files are distributed to                  including cryogenics, fluid handling, detector diagnostic
the data-processing centers for offline data processing and                  sensors, high voltage, and electronics monitoring. Not
analysis.                                                                    included in this system are the SURF-managed controls
                                                                             ensuring personnel safety (for example, oxygen deficiency
                                                                        18
alarms and sensors). The functionality provided by the                 The PLC system is responsible for the automated re-
Controls system can be classified in the following four cat-      covery of xenon in emergency scenarios and must be ro-
egories: 1) protection against xenon loss and contamina-          bust against single-point failures. This begins with the
tion, 2) experiment parameter monitoring and logging, 3)          the Siemens dual-CPU system. The system is powered by
control over LZ subsystems, and 4) providing the interface        redundant 24 VDC supplies fed by two separate electrical
to operators.                                                     panels, one of which is supported by an 8 kVA APC Sym-
     In order to minimize risks associated with possible xenon    metra UPS. Both panels are also supported by backup
loss or contamination, instruments and subsystems are di-         diesel powered electrical generator, capable of powering
vided in two major groups with respect to the perceived           the PLC system and xenon recovery compressors for the
impact of their possible malfunction on the integrity of the      time required to complete xenon recovery.
xenon supply. Those where equipment failure or operator                Each Siemens CPU has its own connection to a com-
error can lead to xenon loss or contamination are desig-          mon set of S7-300 I/O Modules, which connect directly
nated “critical” and the rest are “non-critical”. During a        to individual instruments/sensors, as well as to a set of
power failure, a combination of UPS and generator power           PROFIBUS-DP Y-links, allowing for redundant control of
will provide continuity to the critical components of the         PROFIBUS instruments. In either case, redundancy does
slow control system.                                              not in general extend to the I/O modules and instruments.
     The PLC system provides automatic protection in the          However, those instruments critical for xenon recovery are
case of an emergency. If the Xe pressure inside the ICV           duplicated to eliminate single-point failures.
reaches a threshold value, or if there is an extended power            Several integrated instruments, including the xenon
outage in the Davis Cavern, the Xe compressors will acti-         compressors, vacuum pump systems, and the liquid ni-
vate and the vaporized xenon will be safely transferred to        trogen generator, have their own dedicated PLCs which
the Xe storage packs. In these scenarios Xe transfer occurs       function as PROFIBUS slaves to the Master PLC. These
automatically without assistance from a human operator.           smaller PLCs are either provided and programmed by the
Additionally, the PLC is programmed with a set of inter-          instrument vendor or, in the case of the xenon compres-
locks to protect the experiment from erroneous operator           sors, built and programmed by LZ.
commands or equipment failure during routine operations.               Each of the four xenon compressors (two circulation
     The functional diagram of the slow control system and        and two recovery) is run by a dedicated Beckhoff CX8031
its interaction with the experiment subsystems and infras-        PLC, which governs compressor startup and shutdown se-
tructure is shown in Fig. 18. The core of the slow control        quences. The PLCs running the two xenon recovery com-
system is composed of three components: (1) the inte-             pressors have the extra feature that they are capable of ini-
grated supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA)           tiating xenon recovery in response to an over-pressure sce-
software platform Ignition from Inductive Automation [32],        nario, triggered by xenon pressure transducers connected
(2) a Siemens SIMATIC S7-410H dual-CPU PLC with Re-               directly to each PLC. The intent is that emergency xenon
dundant Hot Backup, allowing bumpless transfer from one           recovery will be initiated and coordinated by the Master
active CPU to the backup, and (3) associated I/O mod-             PLC, with this slave-initiated recovery as a backup.
ules [33]. Non-critical instruments connect directly to the            The choice of Ignition as the software platform for LZ
Ignition server, typically using MODBUS-TCP over the              Controls is based on the wide range of highly customizable,
slow control local network. Critical instruments are man-         easy to use core functions and tools for development of ef-
aged by the PLCs, which in turn communicates with the             ficient and robust SCADA systems. Ignition also comes
Ignition server.                                                  with a versatile toolbox for GUI design and a comprehen-
     The Ignition server provides a single operator interface,    sive library of device drivers supporting most of the hard-
alarm system, and historical record for all slow control in-      ware used in LZ. One of these drivers supports Siemens
strumentation. It provides authorized users with access to        PLCs allowing to export the PLC tags (internal variables).
specific controls. In addition, the Ignition server provides      Devices connected to the PLC can be exposed to Ignition
the scripting engine for experiment automation. Ignition          as sensors and controls. For the rest of the devices the
also provides a GUI for accessing historical data in the          preferred protocol is MODBUS which is also supported by
form of plots by local and remote clients. The config-            the Ignition server. For those devices that do not support
uration data (properties of sensors and controls, alarms,         MODBUS (e.g. RGA units), two interfacing methods are
and user preferences) are stored in the local configuration       envisaged: 1) custom Java drivers written in the Ignition
database.                                                         software development kit, and 2) Python MODBUS server
     For critical systems, which include xenon handling,          with plugin system or custom Python drivers.
cryogenics, and grid high voltage, PLCs add an additional              The operator interface is comprised of a set of pan-
layer between the slow control software and the physical          els, organized into a tree view. At a lower GUI level, the
instruments. This ensures uninterrupted control of critical       panels represent the experiment subsystem via functional
instruments and separates the low level logic governed by         diagrams with relevant information on the state of sensors
PLCs from the higher level operations run by the Ignition         and controls displayed in real time. The authorized system
scripting engine.                                                 experts can also use these GUI panels to alter the controls
                                                             19
                                                                                                   SURF surface
             LN Distribution            Local    Local HMI      Direct                            (direct ﬁber link)
             Thermosiphons               Dev. (Ignition Client) control                                   Remote HMI
                                                                                                         (Ignition client)
                 Gids HV                                                                     SURF
                                                                                            gateway VPN
              Xe gas system                                                 Local
                                                 Local Network              switch
                 Storage                                                                        DAQ & Electronics
                                        Master
                                         PLC                Ignition Server                           Detector
                Circulation                          HW Interface       Alarm system                 Calibration
             Compressor 1         PLC                Tag manager        Automation
                                                     DB interface       Historian                  Environment
             Compressor 2         PLC
                                                                       ICE module                     PMT HV
                                                     Conﬁg. DB
                Recovery
             Compressor 1         PLC                                                               Run Control

             Compressor 2         PLC                Online DB
                                                                                                     Ofﬂine DB
                                  UPS/Generator Powered

                                          Figure 18: Slow control functional diagram.


not protected by the PLC interlocks. At a higher level,
several panels show the real-time status of the system and
subsystems from which a trained operator is able to tell
the overall health of the system. These panels also allow
to assess high level information, for example alarm sta-
tus, current operation mode, status of automation scripts,
etc. At a very high level, a single summary plot of the
entire system can be prepared by slow control and sent to
run control for display in a single status panel on the run
control GUI.

7. Detector Assembly
    LZ is being installed inside the existing 25’ diameter,
20’ tall Davis Cavern water tank used for the LUX ex-
periment. Access to the water tank is down the 4850’
vertical Yates shaft and through horizontal drifts. Some
large items of equipment are segmented and transported
underground in sections, including the OCV (three sec-
tions), and the tall AVs (four sections). Other items, like
the ICV and its TPC payload, and the LXe tower, are
                                                                   Figure 19: Intermediate assembly. A section through the Davis Cam-
transported and installed after being fully assembled on           pus showing the OCV ready to receive the ICV, and the ICV sus-
the surface.                                                       pended above with cable conduits. 1-Deck; 2-Water tank.
    Substantial changes to the infrastructure of the Davis
Campus were required to accommodate the detector size
increase from LUX to LZ. This included creating more               frame was mounted in a rotatable assembly, slung under
floor space with a platform for cable breakouts, conversion        the cage, and lowered to the 4850’ level. The rotatable
of the compressor room roof to a space for purification and        assembly was used to move each 5000 pound unit around
Xe sampling equipment, and converting two previously un-           duct work and other obstacles between the cage and the
used excavations to spaces for Xe storage and Rn removal           Davis Cavern upper deck. Each AV was wrapped in two
equipment.                                                         plastic bags to keep dust from contaminating the acrylic
    Underground assembly started in 2018 with the trans-           and the water tank. The AVs are sensitive to large tem-
port of the 12-foot tall AVs. Each AV was contained in             perature changes so timing and speed were also important
a heavy steel frame. At the top of the Yates shaft the             considerations during transport.

                                                              20
    After the four tall AVs were placed inside the water            8. Materials Screening & Backgrounds
tank, the three sections of the OCV were transported un-
derground and installed on support legs inside. After a                 Material screening is the primary route to controlling
leak cheak, and a final washing of the water tank and its           the ER and NR backgrounds resulting from radioactiv-
equipment, the OCV top was removed and stored to pre-               ity in the experiment. Measurements of radioactive nu-
pare for ICV installation, and cleanroom protocols were             clides in and on all detector components are required. The
instituted for entering and exiting the area. An under-             ubiquitous and naturally occurring radioactive materials
ground radon reduction system treats the air supplied to            (NORM) of particular concern are the γ-ray emitting nu-
the water tank during the remainder of the assembly.                clides 40 K; 137 Cs; and 60 Co, as well as 238 U, 235 U, 232 Th,
    Much of the TPC assembly work was done in the Sur-              and their progeny. The U and Th chains are also respon-
face Assembly Lab (SAL) at SURF because of its superior             sible for neutron production following spontaneous fission
logistics compared to the underground. A well sealed class          and (α,n) reactions. Kr and Rn outgassing from materials
1000 clean room with reduced radon air supply [34] and              into the Xe also results in ER backgrounds, and α-emitting
a clean monorail crane was used for cryostat acceptance,            Rn daughters can contribute to neutron backgrounds when
TPC assembly, and insertion of the TPC into the ICV.                deposited on certain materials.
The Reduced Radon System (RRS) has been measured                        Fixed contamination, referring to non-mobile NORM
to produce air laden with radon at a specific activity of           nuclides embedded within materials, is the dominant source
4 mBq/m3 given input air at about 8.5 Bq/m3 . The PMT               of neutron and γ-ray emission in LZ. To ensure a sub-
and instrumentation cables are routed through three rein-           dominant contribution from fixed contaminants, relative
forced bellows attached to the ICV, and the entire assem-           to irreducible backgrounds, all materials considered for
bly is transported underground together. During trans-              use in the construction of the experiment are screened for
port the bellows are sealed and the ICV is purged with              NORM nuclides to ≈0.2 mBq/kg sensitivities, equivalent
boil off LN. This begins the process of removing H2 O, O2 ,         to tens of parts per trillion (ppt) g/g for 238 U and 232 Th.
and Kr from the large mass of PTFE in the detector. All             This ensures a maximum contribution from fixed contam-
subsequent assembly steps are designed to keep the TPC              ination of less than 0.4 NR and 1 × 10−6 events/(kev ·
under nitrogen purge until it can be evacuated and filled           kg · year) ER in the LZ exposure. For materials such as
with Xe gas.                                                        PTFE, which are produced in granular form before being
    The TPC is assembled and installed into the ICV ver-            sintered in molds, plate-out constitutes additional risk be-
tically. To move underground, the assembly is rotated to            cause surface contamination of the granular form becomes
horizontal, set in a transport frame, and moved to the              contamination in bulk when the granules are poured into
Yates headframe. Slings attached to the underside of the            molds. A limit of 10 mBq/kg of 210 Po and 210 Pb in PTFE
cage are used to lift the assembly into a vertical position         maintains an NR contribution of <0.1 count in the LZ
underneath the cage. This process is reversed at the 4850’          exposure.
level, returning it to horizontal, for transport down the               Radon emanated from within detector components is
drift. It is set vertical again on a shielding platform over        the dominant contributor to background in LZ, primar-
the water tank. A temporary clean room is constructed               ily through the “naked” beta emission from 214 Pb in the
                                                                    222
around the ICV, and the last protective bag is removed.                 Rn sub-chain as it decays to 214 Bi. The 214 Bi beta
The ICV is connected to the OCV top by three tie bars               decay itself is readily identified by the subsequent 214 Po
(instrumented threaded rods) that allow for precision lev-          alpha decay that would be observed within an LZ event
eling of the TPC relative to the liquid Xe surface while            timeline (T1/2 =160 µs). Similar coincidence rejection also
minimizing thermal losses. During final lowering into the           occurs where beta decay is accompanied by a high-energy
OCV the ICV is supported by the tie bars. Once sealed,              γ-ray, which may still be tagged by the Xe Skin or OD ve-
the ICV is evacuated, and the AVs and OD PMTs are as-               toes even if it leaves the active Xe volume. 220 Rn generates
                                                                    212
sembled around the OCV in the water tank. A rendering                   Pb, resulting in 212 Bi-212 Po sequential events which can
of the ICV just prior to nesting within the OCV is shown            be tagged. Radon daughters are readily identified through
in Fig. 19.                                                         their alpha decay signatures and can be used to character-
    A second radon reduction system is available in the             ize the 222 Rn and 220 Rn decay chain rates and distribu-
Davis Cavern to supply air depleted of radon. It has                tions in the active region, providing a useful complement to
demonstrated an output of 100 mBq/m3 given input air                estimating radon concentration from the beta decay con-
of 70 Bq/m3 .                                                       tribution to the ER background.
    The water and GdLS are co-filled to minimize stress in              The specific activity of 222 Rn in LZ is required to be
the AV walls. The GdLS will be transported underground              less than 2 µBq/kg of LXe, equivalent to 20 mBq. All
in 150 sealed barrels. Each is placed on a scale in a clean         xenon-wetted components in LZ have been constructed
tent before connection to the liquid transfer system. The           from low-radon materials selected through dedicated mea-
liquid is pumped into the GdLS reservoir and distributed            surement facilities. Due to the large number of expected
to the AVs. Once the liquids are filled detector commis-            emitters, these facilities were required to achieve sensi-
sioning can begin.                                                  tivity of 0.2 mBq to 222 Rn. Measurements are made at

                                                               21
room temperature, however, the expected emanation can                 and 232 Th, particularly those with energies in excess of
depend strongly on temperature depending on the source                several hundred keV. Background-subtracted γ-ray count-
material. A conservative approach is adopted in estimat-              ing is performed around specific energy ranges to identify
ing radon emanation in our model, taking credit for a re-             radioactive nuclides. Taking into account the detector ef-
duction at LXe temperatures wherever this is supported                ficiency at that energy for the specific sample geometry
in the literature. Significant background from 220 Rn is not          allows calculation of isotopic concentrations. A typical as-
expected given its very short half-life; we conservatively in-        say lasts 1–2 weeks per sample to accrue statistics at the
clude in our background model a contribution from 220 Rn              sensitivities required for the LZ assays. These direct γ-ray
of 20% of the ER counts from 222 Rn.                                  assays probe radioactivity from the bulk of materials and
    The accumulation of 222 Rn-daughters plated-out dur-              may identify equilibrium states.
ing the manufacture and assembly of components as well                     Sixteen HPGe detectors located in facilities both above-
as dust and particulates contribute to the LZ background.             and underground have been used for LZ, with differences in
The α-particle emitting Rn-daughters can induce neutrons              detector types and shielding configuration providing use-
via (α,n) processes, particularly problematic for materials           ful dynamic range both in terms of sensitivity to partic-
with large cross-sections for this process such as flourine,          ular nuclides and to varying sample geometries. The de-
present in the TPC walls (PTFE). Plate-out on the inside              tectors are typically several hundreds of grams to several
of the TPC walls causes α-particles and recoiling ions to             kilograms in mass, with a mixture of n-type, p-type, and
enter the active volume. The risk of mis-reconstructing               broad energy Ge (BEGe) crystals, providing relative effi-
these recoils into the fiducial volume in particular sets             ciency at the tens of percent through to in excess of 100%
stringent constraints on plate-out on the PTFE. LZ in-                (as compared to the detection efficiency of a (3 × 3)-inch
stituted a target for plate-out of 210 Pb and 210 Po of less          NaI crystal for 1.33 MeV γ-rays from a 60 Co source placed
than 0.5 mBq/m2 on the TPC walls and below 10 mBq/m2                  25 cm from the detector face). While p-type crystals can
everywhere else.                                                      be grown to larger sizes and hence require less counting
    Generic dust containing NORM also releases γ-rays                 time due to their high efficiency, the low energy perfor-
and induce neutron emission. Dust is further expected                 mance of the n-type and broad energy crystals is superior
to be the single largest contributor to radon emanation.              due to less intervening material between source and ac-
Dust contamination is limited to less than 500 ng/cm2 on              tive Ge. Clean samples are placed close to the Ge crystal
all wetted surfaces in the detector and xenon circulation             and assayed for several days to weeks in order to accrue
system. Under the conservative assumption that 25% of                 sufficient statistics, depending on the minimum detectable
222
    Rn is released from the dust, via either emanation or             activity (MDA). The detectors are generally shielded with
recoils out of small grain-size particulates, this limits the         low-activity Pb and Cu, flushed with dry nitrogen to dis-
222
    Rn activity from dust to less than 10 mBq.                        place the Rn-carrying air, and sometimes are surrounded
                                                                      by veto detectors to suppress background from Compton
8.1. HPGe + MS Techniques and Instruments                             scattering that dominates the MDA for low-energy γ-rays.
    The LZ screening campaign deploys several mature tech-            To reduce backgrounds further, most of the detectors are
niques for the identification and characterization of ra-             operated in underground sites [35, 36], lowering the muon
dioactive species within these bulk detector materials, pri-          flux by several orders of magnitude. We also utilize a num-
marily γ-ray spectroscopy with High Purity Germanium                  ber of surface counters, some of them employing active
(HPGe) detectors and Inductively-Coupled Plasma Mass                  cosmic rate veto systems, that are particularly useful for
Spectrometry (ICP-MS), supported by Neutron Activation                pre-screenings before more sensitive underground assays.
Analysis (NAA). These complementary techniques collec-                     To ensure uniform analysis outputs for all HPGe detec-
tively produce a complete picture of the fixed radiological           tors, a cross-calibration program was performed using all
contaminants.                                                         detectors active in 2014. This involved the blind assay of
    Sensitivity to U and Th decay chain species down to               a Marinelli beaker containing ≈ 2 kg of Rhyolite sourced
≈10 ppt has been demonstrated using ultralow-background               from the Davis Cavern at SURF. This sample had previ-
HPGe detectors. HPGe can also assay 60 Co, 40 K, and                  ously been characterized using the MAEVE p-type HPGe
other radioactive species emitting γ-rays. This technique             detector at LBNL. Across the eight detectors online at
is nondestructive and, in addition to screening of candi-             the time, assays for both 238 U and 232 Th were within 1σ
date materials, finished components can be assayed prior              of each-other. As additional detectors have been brought
to installation. Under the assumption of secular equilib-             online, consistency has been assured by cross-calibration
rium, the U and Th content, assuming natural terres-                  intra-facility.
trial abundance ratios, may be inferred from the mea-                      ICP-MS offers precise determination of elemental con-
surement of isotopic decay emissions lower in their respec-           tamination with potentially up to 100× better sensitivity
tive chains. However, secular equilibrium can be broken               for the progenitor U and Th concentrations compared to γ-
through removal of reactive nuclides during chemical pro-             ray spectroscopy. Since ICP-MS directly assays the 238 U,
                                                                      235
cessing or through emanation. HPGe readily identifies the                 U, and 232 Th progenitor activity it informs the contri-
concentrations of nuclides from mid- to late-chain 238 U              bution to neutron flux from (α,n) in low-Z materials, but
                                                                 22
Table 5: Primary material radio-assay techniques, indicating isotopic sensitivity and detection limits, as well as typical throughput or single-
sample measurement duration.
                                                                                   Destructive/Non-         Locations (and
                    Isotopic                Typical         Sample    Sampling                                                     Samples
   Technique                                                                        destructive and           Number of
                   Sensitivity             Sensitivity       Mass     Duration                                                     Assayed
                                                                                         Notes              Systems if > 1)
                    238        235
                          U,  U,
                         232                                                         Non-destructive,
                          Th                                                                                    SURF ×6,
                           40
                                          5 × 10
                                                 −11
                                                   g/g U,                          very versatile, not as
                   chains, K,                                          Up to 2                                  LBNL ×1,
     HPGe          60     137                −10              kg                     sensitive as other                               926
                      Co,     Cs           10    g/g Th                 weeks                                U. Alabama ×2,
                                                                                     techniques, large
                    any γ-ray                                                                                   Boulby ×7
                                                                                          samples
                      emitter
                    238        235
                       U,    U,                                                    Destructive, requires
                    232                       −12                                                           UCL, IBS, BHUC,
    ICP-MS             Th (top              10      g/g     mg to g     Days        sample digestion,                                 157
                                                                                                              U. Alabama
                     of chain)                                                     preparation critical

                    238        235                                                  Destructive, useful       Irradiated at
                        U,    U,             −12
                    232                    10   g/g to                 Days to       for non-metals,         MITR-II, HPGe
     NAA                Th (top               −14             g                                                                        3
                                            10    g/g                   weeks        minimal sample              assay at
                    of chain), K
                                                                                       preparation            U. Alabama

                                                                                   Destructive, minimal
                    238        235
                       U,    U,                                                       matrix effects,
                    232                       −10                                                           National Research
    GD-MS              Th (top              10      g/g     mg to g     Days          cannot analyze                                   2
                                                                                                             Council Canada
                     of chain)                                                      ceramics and other
                                                                                        insulators

                                                                                      Non-destructive,          UCL ×2,
   Radon                 222                                           1 to 3          large samples,         U. Maryland,
                               Rn            0.1 mBq          kg                                                                      175
  Emanation                                                            weeks         limited by size of      SDSM&T ×2,
                                                                                    emanation chamber        U. Alabama ×2

                                                                                                            SDSM&T (Si),
                         210                           2                           Non-destructive, thin
                               Pb,          120 α/(m ·                                                       Brown (XIA),             306
   Surface α       210         210                          g to kg   <1 week          samples, large
                         Bi,         Po        day)                                                          Boulby (XIA),
                                                                                   surface area required
                                                                                                            U. Alabama (Si)



also the contribution from spontaneous fission, which in                     simply monitored and reported as an equivalent concen-
specific materials can dominate. However, it cannot iden-                    tration, and lower concentration samples allow for external
tify daughter nuclides in the U and Th decay chains that                     calibrations and a significantly relaxed cleaning schedule,
are better probed by HPGe. The ICP-MS technique as-                          allowing to measure less demanding samples at the rate
says very small samples that are atomized and measured                       of several per day with sensitivities to U and Th on the
with a mass spectrometer. As a destructive technique,                        order of a few hundred ppt. Finally, some initial work has
it is not used on finished components. The limitation of                     been done to develop measurements of potassium using
ICP-MS is that the sample must be acid soluble and that                      the cold plasma configuration, leading to measurements of
several samples from materials must be screened to probe                     a few hundred ppb of K.
contamination distribution and homogeneity. Assays take                          NAA has been used by LZ to assay PTFE to sub-ppt
1–2 days per material, dominated by the sample prepa-                        g/g levels of 238 U and 232 Th that is not well suited to
ration time, where extreme care must be taken to avoid                       HPGe, due to the sensitivity, nor ICP-MS, due to diffi-
contamination of solvents and reactants.                                     culty in digesting PTFE. However, as with ICP-MS, this
    ICP-MS assays for LZ materials have been performed                       technique requires small sample masses, does not assay fin-
using several facilities, the majority of which operate Ag-                  ished components, and assumptions of secular equilibrium
ilent 7900 ICP-MS systems within minimum ISO Class 6                         need to be made since this technique measures the top
cleanrooms [37]. These are capable of achieving sensitiv-                    of the U and Th chains. Samples are irradiated with neu-
ity to U and Th in materials at the level of several ppt.                    trons from a reactor to activate some of the stable nuclides,
Protocols and methodologies for sample preparation are                       which subsequently emit γ-rays of well-known energy and
largely based on well established procedures [38–40].                        half-life that are detected through γ-ray spectroscopy. El-
    These measurements take significant time owing to the                    emental concentrations are then inferred, using tabulated
need for high statistics, standard addition calibration of                   neutron-capture cross sections convolved with the reac-
high-concentration samples, and frequent machine clean-                      tor neutron spectra. Depending on the surface treatment,
ing. For more routine measurements, the backgrounds are                      NAA can probe both bulk and surface contamination. Its

                                                                        23
application and sensitivity are limited by the composition          8.4. Cleaning procedures and protocols (ASTM standards)
of the material.                                                        A rigorous program of cleanliness management is im-
                                                                    plemented to ensure that the accumulated surface and dust
8.2. Radon Emanation Techniques and Instruments                     contamination are monitored, tracked and do not exceed
     Radon emanation measurements of all xenon-wetted               requirements. All detector components that contact xenon
components within the inner cryostat and those in the               must be cleaned and assembled according to validated
gas system that come into contact with Xe during experi-            cleanliness protocols to achieve the dust deposition levels
mental operation have been performed using four facilities          below 500 ng/cm2 and plate-out levels below 0.5 mBq/m2
available to LZ, listed in Table 5. In all of the facilities        for the TPC inner-walls, and 10 mBq/m2 everywhere else.
radon is accumulated in emanation chambers, where sam-              Witness plates accompany the production and assembly
ples typically remain for two weeks or more. In many cases          of all detector components to ensure QC and demonstrate
multiple measurements are performed per sample. The                 QA through the plate-out and dust assays. The titanium
radon is then transferred using a carrier gas to a detector         cryostat was cleaned by AstroPak [16] to ASTM standard
to be counted.                                                      IEST-STD-CC1246 (rev E) level 50R1 (ICV) and level
     In one of the stations, the radon atoms are collected          VC-0.5-1000-500UV (OCV). The ICV cleaning standard
and counted by passing the radon-bearing gas through liq-           is equivalent to the requirement that mass density of dust
uid, dissolving most of the radon. The scintillator is then         be less than 100 ng/cm2 . The vessels were etched accord-
used to count Bi-Po coincidences, detected through gated            ing to ASTM B-600.
coincidence logic, using one PMT viewing the scintillator.              As described in Sec. 7, detector integration is done in a
In the other three stations, radon atoms and daughters are          reduced-radon cleanroom at the SAL at SURF. Dust and
collected electrostatically onto silicon PIN diode detectors        plate-out monitoring on-site was continuously performed
to detect 218 Po and 214 Po alpha decays. The radon screen-         to measure and maintain compliance with tolerable dust
ing systems have been developed such that anything from             and plate-out levels.
individual components through to sections of LZ pipework
may be assayed.                                                     8.5. Backgrounds summary
     All stations were initially evaluated using calibrated             Measured material radioactivity and anticipated levels
sources of radon, with a cross-calibration program per-             of dispersed and surface radioactivity are combined with
formed to ensure the accuracy of each system’s overall ef-          the Monte Carlo simulations and analysis cuts to deter-
ficiency and ability to estimate and subtract backgrounds.          mine background rates in the detector. Table 8.3 presents
     The radon-emanation screening campaign extends be-             integrated background ER and NR counts in the 5.6 tonne
yond the material selection and construction phase and              fiducial mass for a 1000 live day run using a reference cut-
into detector integration and commissioning phases. A               and-count analysis, both before and after ER discrimina-
system is available underground at SURF in order to screen          tion cuts are applied. For the purposes of tracking mate-
large-scale assembled detector elements and plumbing lines.         rial radioactivity throughout the design and construction
As pieces or sections are completed during installation of          of LZ, Table 8.3 is based on a restricted region of interest
gas pipework for the LZ experiment, they are isolated and           relevant to a 40 GeV/c2 WIMP spectrum, equivalent to
assessed for Rn emanation and outgassing for early iden-            approximately 1.5–6.5 keV for ERs and 6–30 keV for NRs.
tification of problematic seals or components that require              The expected total from all ER(NR) background sources
replacement, cleaning, or correction.                               is 1195(1.24) counts in the full 1000 live day exposure.
                                                                    Applying discrimination against ER at 99.5% for an NR
8.3. Surface Assays (XIA, Si, dust microscopy)                      acceptance of 50% (met for all WIMP masses given the
    Two sensitive detectors have been used to carry out             nominal drift field and light collection efficiency in LZ [4])
assays of Rn plate-out to ensure the requirements are met           suppresses the ER(NR) background to 5.97(0.62) counts.
and inform the experiment background model. The first               Radon presents the largest contribution to the total num-
is the commercial XIA Ultralo-1800 surface alpha detec-             ber of events. Atmospheric neutrinos are the largest con-
tor system, suitable for routine screening of small sam-            tributor to NR counts, showing that LZ is approaching
ples including witness plates and coupons deployed dur-             the irreducible background from coherent neutrino scat-
ing component assembly and transport to track exposure.             tering [41].
The second detector employs a panel of large-area Si de-
tectors installed in a large vacuum chamber. These sys-
                                                                    9. Offline Computing
tems exceed the requisite sensitivity to 210 Po at the level
of 0.5 mBq/m2 . Dust assays are performed using high-                  The LZ data is stored, processed and distributed using
powered microscopy and x-ray fluorescence techniques.               two data centers, one in the U.S. and one in the U.K. Both
                                                                    data centers are capable of storing, processing, simulating
                                                                    and analyzing the LZ data in near real-time. Resource
                                                                    optimization, redundancy, and ease of data access for all

                                                               24
Table 6: The estimated backgrounds from all significant sources in the LZ 1000 day WIMP search exposure. Mass-weighted average activities
                                        8
are shown for composite materials. Solar B and hep neutrinos are only expected to contribute at very low energies (i.e. WIMP masses)
and are excluded from the table.
                                                                                                              ER      NR
             Background Source
                                                                                                             (cts)   (cts)

            Detector Components                                                                                 9       0.07

            Surface Contamination                                                                              40       0.39
                                              2
            Dust (intrinsic activity, 500 ng/cm )                                                              0.2      0.05
                                                    2
            Plate-out (PTFE panels, 50 nBq/cm )                                                                 -       0.05
            210
                  Bi mobility (0.1 µBq/kg)                                                                    40.0          -
                                              2
            Ion misreconstruction (50 nBq/cm )                                                                  -       0.16
            210
                  Pb (in bulk PTFE, 10 mBq/kg)                                                                  -       0.12

            Laboratory and Cosmogenics                                                                          5       0.06
            Laboratory Rock Walls                                                                              4.6      0.00
            Muon Induced Neutrons                                                                               -       0.06
            Cosmogenic Activation                                                                              0.2          -

            Xenon Contaminants                                                                                 819          0
            222
                  Rn (1.81 µBq/kg)                                                                             681          -
            220
                  Rn (0.09 µBq/kg)                                                                             111          -
            nat
                  Kr (0.015 ppt)                                                                              24.5          -
            nat
                  Ar (0.45 ppb)                                                                                2.5          -

            Physics                                                                                            322      0.51
            136
                  Xe 2νββ                                                                                      67           -
                                     7   13
            Solar Neutrinos: pp+ Be+ N                                                                         255          -
            Diffuse Supernova Neutrinos                                                                         -       0.05
            Atmospheric Neutrinos                                                                               -       0.46

            Total                                                                                             1,195     1.03
            Total (with 99.5 % ER discrimination, 50 % NR efficiency)                                         5.97      0.51
            Sum of ER and NR in LZ for 1000 days, 5.6 tonne FV, with all analysis cuts                               6.49




                                                                   25
LZ collaborators are the guiding principles of this dual           applies the calibrations, looks for S1 and S2 candidate
data-center design.                                                events, performs the event reconstruction, and produces
    LZ raw data are initially written to the surface stag-         the so-called reduced quantity (RQ) files, which represent
ing computer at SURF, which was designed with sufficient           the primary input for the physics analyses.
capacity to store approximately two months of LZ data,                 LZap is based on the Hive version of the Gaudi code,
running in WIMP-search mode. This guarantees conti-                which is specially designed to provide multi-threading at
nuity of operations in case of a major network outage.             the sub-event level. The framework supports the develop-
The surface staging computer at SURF transfers the raw             ment of different physics modules from LZ collaborators
data files to the U.S. data center, where initial process-         and automatically takes care of the basic data handling
ing is performed. The reconstructed data files are made            (I/O, event/run selection, DB interfaces, etc.). Gaudi fea-
available to all groups in the collaboration and represent         tures a well established mechanism for extending its input
the primary input for the physics analyses. The U.S. data          and output modules to handle custom formats. This func-
center is hosted at the National Energy Research Scientific        tionality has has been exploited in the design of the LZ
Computing (NERSC) center [42]. Data simulation and re-             raw data and RQ formats.
construction at NERSC is performed using a number of                   All non-DAQ data, i.e. any data that is not read out by
Cray supercomputers [43].                                          the DAQ with each event, is stored in a database known
    The raw and reconstructed files are mirrored to the            as the “conditions database”. This database can auto-
U.K. data center (hosted at Imperial College London) both          matically understand the interval of validity for each piece
as a backup, and to share the load of file access and pro-         of data (based on timestamps), and supports data ver-
cessing. Subsequent reprocessing of the data (following            sioning for instances such as when better calibrations be-
new calibrations, updated reconstruction and identifica-           come available. This design implements a hierarchy of data
tion algorithms, etc.) is expected to take place at one or         sources, which means that during development of code or
both locations, with the newly generated files mirrored at         calibrations it is possible to specify alternate sources, al-
both sites and made available to the collaboration. Sim-           lowing for the validation of updated entries.
ulation and data processing at the U.K. data center are                All LZ software is centrally maintained through a soft-
performed using distributed GridPP resources [44, 45].             ware repository based on GitLab [51]. GitLab provides a
                                                                   continuous integration tool, allowing for automatic testing
9.1. The Offline Software Stack                                    and installation of the offline codebase on the U.S. and
     The LZ Offline software stack is based on standard            U.K. data center servers. Build automation is inherited
HEP frameworks, specifically Geant4 for simulations [46]           from the Gaudi infrastructure and supported via CMake.
and Gaudi for reconstruction [47].                                 Release Management and Version Control standards were
     The simulation package is called BACCARAT [48]. This          strictly enforced from a very early stage of the experiment
software provides object-oriented coding capability specif-        to ensure sharing, verifiability and reproducibility of the
ically tuned for noble liquid detectors, working on top of         results. Each code release undergoes a battery of tests be-
the Geant4 engine. BACCARAT can produce detailed, ac-              fore being deployed to production. Release management
curate simulations of the LZ detector response and back-           ensures that all the changes are properly communicated
grounds, which are crucial both for detector design and            and documented, to achieve full reproducibility.
during data analysis. The physics accuracy of the LZ sim-              Software distribution is achieved via CernVM File Sys-
ulations package was validated during the science run of           tem (CVMFS) [52]. CVMFS is a CERN-developed net-
LUX, as described in [49].                                         work file system based on HTTP and optimized to de-
     BACCARAT is integrated into the broader LZ analy-             liver experiment software in a fast, scalable, and reliable
sis framework, from production to validation and analysis.         way. Files and file metadata are cached and downloaded on
Two output formats are supported, a raw simulation out-            demand. CVMFS features robust error handling and se-
put at the interaction level, and a reduced tree format at         cure access over untrusted networks [53]. The LZ CVMFS
the event level. Both output files are written in the ROOT         server is visible to all the machines in the U.S. and U.K.
data format [50]. A Detector Electronics Response pack-            data centers. All the LZ software releases and external
age can be used to emulate the signal processing done by           packages are delivered via CVMFS: this ensures a unified
the front-end electronics of LZ. It reads raw photon hits          data production and analysis stream, because every user
from BACCARAT to create mock digitized waveforms, or-              can access identical builds of the same executables, remov-
ganized and written in an identical format to the output of        ing possible dependencies on platform and configuration.
the LZ data acquisition system. These can be read in by                A rigorous program of Mock Data Challenges has been
the analysis software, providing practice data for frame-          enacted, in order to validate the entire software stack and
work development and analysis.                                     to prepare the collaboration for science analysis. The first
     The data processing and reconstruction software (LZ           data challenge simulated the initial LZ commissioning and
analysis package, or LZap for short) extracts the PMT              tested the functionality of the reconstruction framework.
charge and time information from the digitized signals,            The second data challenge covered the first science run of
                                                                   LZ and tested the entire data analysis chain, including cal-
                                                              26
ibrations, detailed backgrounds and potential signals. The          References
third and final data challenge is currently underway (2019)
                                                                     [1] D. S. Akerib, et al., The Large Underground Xenon (LUX) Ex-
and will test the complete analysis strategy, validating the             periment, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A704 (2013) 111–126. arXiv:
readiness of the offline system just before the underground              1211.3788, doi:10.1016/j.nima.2012.11.135.
installation of LZ.                                                  [2] D. S. Akerib, et al., Results from a search for dark matter in the
                                                                         complete LUX exposure, Phys. Rev. Lett. 118 (2) (2017) 021303.
                                                                         arXiv:1608.07648, doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.118.021303.
10. Conclusion                                                       [3] D. Yu. Akimov, et al., WIMP-nucleon cross-section results from
                                                                         the second science run of ZEPLIN-III, Phys. Lett. B709 (2012)
    Considerable progress has been made towards imple-                   14–20. arXiv:1110.4769, doi:10.1016/j.physletb.2012.01.
menting the LZ conceptual and technical designs described                064.
                                                                     [4] B. J. Mount, et al., LUX-ZEPLIN (LZ) Technical Design Re-
in Refs. [4, 5]. The start of science operations is ex-                  portarXiv:1703.09144.
pected 2020. The projected background rate enables a                 [5] D. S. Akerib, et al., LUX-ZEPLIN (LZ) Conceptual Design Re-
1000 day exposure of the 5.6 tonne fiducial mass, with a                 port, Conceptual Design Report; LBNL-190005, FERMILAB-
spin-independent cross-section sensitivity of 1.5×10−48 cm2              TM-2621-AE-E-PPD. arXiv:1509.02910.
                                                                     [6] D. S. Akerib, et al., Projected WIMP Sensitivity of the LUX-
(90% C.L.) at 40 GeV/c2 . This will probe a significant por-             ZEPLIN (LZ) Dark Matter ExperimentarXiv:1802.06039.
tion of the viable WIMP dark matter parameter space. LZ              [7] D. S. Akerib, et al., Identification of Radiopure Titanium for the
is also be sensitive to spin-dependent interactions, through             LZ Dark Matter Experiment and Future Rare Event Searches,
                                                                         Astropart. Phys. 96 (2017) 1–10. arXiv:1702.02646, doi:10.
the odd neutron number isotopes 129 Xe and 131 Xe (26.4%                 1016/j.astropartphys.2017.09.002.
and 21.2% respectively by mass). For spin-dependent WIMP-            [8] D. Y. Akimov, A. I. Bolozdynya, Y. V. Efremenko, V. A. Kaplin,
neutron(-proton) scattering a sensitivity of 2.7×10−43 cm2               A. V. Khromov, Y. A. Melikyan, V. V. Sosnovtsev, Observation
(8.1×10−42 cm2 ) is expected at 40 GeV/c2 .                              of light emission from Hamamatsu R11410-20 photomultiplier
                                                                         tubes, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A794 (2015) 1–2. arXiv:1504.
                                                                         07651, doi:10.1016/j.nima.2015.04.066.
11. Acknowledgements                                                 [9] B. López Paredes, H. M. Araújo, F. Froborg, N. Marangou,
                                                                         I. Olcina, T. J. Sumner, R. Taylor, A. Tomás, A. Vacheret,
    This work was partially supported by the U.S. Depart-                Response of photomultiplier tubes to xenon scintillation light,
                                                                         Astropart. Phys. 102 (2018) 55–66. arXiv:1801.01597, doi:
ment of Energy (DOE) Office of Science under contract                    10.1016/j.astropartphys.2018.04.006.
number DE-AC02-05CH11231 and under grant number                     [10] F. Neves, A. Lindote, A. Morozov, V. Solovov, C. Silva, P. Bras,
de-sc0019066; by the U.S. National Science Foundation                    J. P. Rodrigues, M. I. Lopes, Measurement of the absolute re-
(NSF); by the U.K. Science & Technology Facilities Coun-                 flectance of polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) immersed in liq-
                                                                         uid xenon, JINST 12 (01) (2017) P01017. arXiv:1612.07965,
cil under award numbers, ST/M003655/1, ST/M003981/1,                     doi:10.1088/1748-0221/12/01/P01017.
ST/M003744/1, ST/M003639/1, ST/M003604/1, and                       [11] J. Haefner, et al., Reflectance dependence of polytetrafluo-
ST/M003469/1; and by the Portuguese Foundation for                       roethylene on thickness for xenon scintillation light, Nucl. In-
                                                                         strum. Meth. A856 (2017) 86–91. arXiv:1608.01717, doi:
Science and Technology (FCT)under award number
                                                                         10.1016/j.nima.2017.01.057.
PTDC/FIS-PAR/28567/2017; and by the Institute for Ba-               [12] C. Lee, Mitigation of Backgrounds for the Large Underground
sic Science, Korea (budget number IBS-R016-D1). Uni-                     Xenon Dark Matter Experiment, Ph.D. thesis, Case Western
versity College London and Lawrence Berkeley National                    Reserve University (2015).
                                                                    [13] E. Bernard, C. H. Faham, T. M. Ito, B. Lundberg, M. Messina,
Laboratory thank the U.K. Royal Society for travel funds                 F. Monrabal, S. P. Pereverzev, F. Resnati, P. C. Rowson,
under the International Exchange Scheme (IE141517). We                   M. Soderberg, T. Strauss, A. Tomas, J. Va’vra, H. Wang, in:
acknowledge additional support from the Boulby Under-                    B. Rebel, C. Hall (Eds.), High Voltage in Noble Liquids for
ground Laboratory in the U.K.; the University of Wis-                    High Energy Physics, Vol. 9 of J. Instrum., 2014, p. T08004,
                                                                         pp. 23-26. arXiv:1403.3613.
consin for grant UW PRJ82AJ; and the GridPP Collab-                 [14] A. Tomás, H. M. Araújo, A. J. Bailey, A. Bayer, E. Chen,
oration, in particular at Imperial College London. This                  B. López Paredes, T. J. Sumner, Study and mitigation of spu-
work was partially enabled by the University College Lon-                rious electron emission from cathodic wires in noble liquid time
don Cosmoparticle Initiative. Futhermore, this research                  projection chambers, Astropart. Phys. 103 (2018) 49–61. arXiv:
                                                                         1801.07231, doi:10.1016/j.astropartphys.2018.07.001.
used resources of the National Energy Research Scientific           [15] California Fine Wire, Grover Beach, California, USA, http:
Computing Center, a DOE Office of Science User Facility                  //www.calfinewire.com//.
supported by the Office of Science of the U.S. Department           [16] Astropak Corp., Costa Mesa, California, https://astropak.
of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231. The                      com//.
                                                                    [17] SAES Pure Gas Inc., San Luis Obispo, California, USA, http:
University of Edinburgh is a charitable body, registered in              //www.saespuregas.com/.com//.
Scotland, with the registration number SC005336. The re-            [18] Fluitron Inc., Ivyland, Pennsylvania, USA, http://fluitron.
search supporting this work took place in whole or in part               com//.
                                                                    [19] K. Pushkin, et al., Study of radon reduction in gases for rare
at the Sanford Underground Research Facility (SURF) in
                                                                         event search experiments, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A903 (2018)
Lead, South Dakota. The assistance of SURF and its per-                  267–276. arXiv:1805.11306, doi:10.1016/j.nima.2018.06.
sonnel in providing physical access and general logistical               076.
and technical support is acknowledged. SURF is a feder-             [20] K. Abe, et al., Radon removal from gaseous xenon with acti-
                                                                         vated charcoal, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 661 (1) (2012) 50 – 57.
ally sponsored research facility under Award Number de-                  doi:10.1016/j.nima.2011.09.051.
sc0020216.
                                                               27
     URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/                          mass spectrometry, Anal. Chem. 77 (2005) 2432–2436. doi:
     S0168900211018468                                                              10.1021/ac048539t.
[21] D. S. Leonard, A. Dobi, C. Hall, L. Kaufman, T. Langford,                 [41] J. Billard, L. Strigari, E. Figueroa-Feliciano, Implication of neu-
     S. Slutsky, Y.-R. Yen, A simple high-sensitivity technique for                 trino backgrounds on the reach of next generation dark matter
     purity analysis of xenon gas, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A621 (2010)                 direct detection experiments, Phys. Rev. D89 (2) (2014) 023524.
     678–684. arXiv:1002.2742, doi:10.1016/j.nima.2010.04.152.                      arXiv:1307.5458, doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.89.023524.
[22] A. Dobi, C. G. Davis, C. Hall, T. Langford, S. Slutsky, Y.-R.             [42] National Energy Research Scientific Computing Center, ac-
     Yen, Detection of krypton in xenon for dark matter applications,               cessed: 2019-03-19 (2019).
     Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A665 (2011) 1–6. arXiv:1103.2714, doi:               [43] DOE to Build Next-Generation Supercomputer at Lawrence
     10.1016/j.nima.2011.11.043.                                                    Berkeley National Laboratory, accessed: 2019-03-19 (2019).
[23] S. Haselschwardt, S. Shaw, H. Nelson, M. Witherell, M. Yeh,               [44] P. J. W. Faulkner, et al., Gridpp: development of the uk com-
     K. Lesko, A. Cole, S. Kyre, D. White, A liquid scintillation                   puting grid for particle physics, J. Phys. G: Nucl. Part. Phys.
     detector for radioassay of gadolinium-loaded liquid scintillator               32 (1) (2006) N1. doi:10.1088/0954-3899/32/1/N01.
     for the lz outer detectorarXiv:1808.05595.                                [45] D. Britton, et al., Gridpp: the uk grid for particle physics,
[24] D. S. Akerib, et al., Measurement of the Gamma Ray Back-                       Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. A 367 (1897) (2009) 2447–
     ground in the Davis Cavern at the Sanford Underground Re-                      2457. doi:10.1098/rsta.2009.0036.
     search FacilityarXiv:1904.02112.                                          [46] S. Agostinelli, et al., GEANT4: A Simulation toolkit,
[25] A. Dobi, Measurement of the Electron Recoil Band of the                        Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A506 (2003) 250–303. doi:10.1016/
     LUX Dark Matter Detector With a Tritium Calibration Source,                    S0168-9002(03)01368-8.
     Ph.D. thesis, University of Maryland, College Park (2014).                [47] G. Barrand, et al., GAUDI - A software architecture and
[26] D. S. Akerib, et al., Tritium calibration of the LUX dark matter               framework for building HEP data processing applications,
     experiment, Phys. Rev. D93 (7) (2016) 072009. arXiv:1512.                      Comput. Phys. Commun. 140 (2001) 45–55. doi:10.1016/
     03133, doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.93.072009.                                         S0010-4655(01)00254-5.
                            83m                                                [48] D. S. Akerib, et al., Simulations of Events for the LUX-ZEPLIN
[27] D. S. Akerib, et al.,       Kr calibration of the 2013 LUX dark
     matter search, Phys. Rev. D96 (11) (2017) 112009. arXiv:1708.                  (LZ) Dark Matter Experiment, In preparation (2019).
     02566, doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.96.112009.                                    [49] D. S. Akerib, et al., LUXSim: A Component-Centric Approach
[28] D. S. Akerib, et al., Low-energy (0.7-74 keV) nuclear recoil cali-             to Low-Background Simulations, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A675
     bration of the LUX dark matter experiment using D-D neutron                    (2012) 63–77. arXiv:1111.2074, doi:10.1016/j.nima.2012.
     scattering kinematicsarXiv:1608.05381.                                         02.010.
[29] W.-I.-N.-R. P. Electronics, http://www.wiener-d.com/.                     [50] R. Brun, F. Rademakers, ROOT: An object oriented data
[30] Skutek instrumentation, http://skutek.com/.                                    analysis framework, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A389 (1997) 81–86.
[31] E. Druszkiewicz, The Data Acquisition System for LZ, JINST                     doi:10.1016/S0168-9002(97)00048-X.
     11 (02) (2016) C02072.         arXiv:1511.08385, doi:10.1088/             [51] Gitlab Inc., accessed: 2015-12-07 (2015).
     1748-0221/11/02/C02072.                                                   [52] J. Blomer, C. Aguado Sanchez, P. Buncic, A. Harutyunyan,
[32] Inductive Automation, 340 Palladio Parkway, Suite 540 (4th                     Distributing LHC application software and conditions databases
     Floor) Folsom, CA 95630-8833, USA, Ignition SQL Bridge                         using the CernVM file system, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser. 331 (2011)
     (2015).                                                                        042003. doi:10.1088/1742-6596/331/4/042003.
[33] Siemens Simatic PCS 7 CPU 410-5H Contoller (2016).                        [53] D. Dykstra, J. Blomer, Security in the CernVM File System and
     URL        http://www.industry.siemens.com/topics/global/                      the Frontier Distributed Database Caching System, J. Phys.
     en/magazines/process-news/process-automation/pages/                            Conf. Ser. 513 (2014) 042015. doi:10.1088/1742-6596/513/4/
     simatic-pcs7-cpu410-5h.aspx                                                    042015.
[34] ATEKO a.s., Hradec Králové, Czech Republic, http://www.
     ateko.cz.
[35] P. Scovell, E. Meehan, H. Araújo, J. Dobson, C. Ghag,
     H. Kraus, V. Kudryavtsev, X.-R. Liu, P. Majewski, S. Paling,
     R. Preece, R. Saakyan, A. Tomás, C. Toth, L. Yeoman, Low-
     background gamma spectroscopy at the boulby underground
     laboratory, Astroparticle Physics 97 (2018) 160 – 173. doi:
     https://doi.org/10.1016/j.astropartphys.2017.11.006.
     URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
     S0927650517302517
[36] B. J. Mount, et al., Black Hills State University Underground
     Campus, Appl. Radiat. Isot. 126 (2017) 130–133. doi:10.1016/
     j.apradiso.2017.02.025.
[37] J. Dobson, C. Ghag, L. Manenti, Ultra-low background
     mass spectrometry for rare-event searches, Nucl. Instrum.
     Meth. AarXiv:1708.08860, doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
     nima.2017.10.014.
     URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
     S0168900217310513
[38] D. S. Leonard, et al., Systematic study of trace radioactive
     impurities in candidate construction materials for EXO-200,
     Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A591 (2008) 490–509. arXiv:0709.4524,
     doi:10.1016/j.nima.2008.03.001.
[39] B. D. LaFerriere, T. C. Maiti, I. J. Arnquist, E. W. Hoppe,
     A novel assay method for the trace determination of Th and
     U in copper and lead using inductively coupled plasma mass
     spectrometry, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A775 (2015) 93–98. doi:
     10.1016/j.nima.2014.11.052.
[40] P. Grinberg, S. Willie, R. Sturgeon, Determination of thorium
     and uranium in ultrapure lead by inductively coupled plasma

                                                                          28
